AI helpers
(Tools)
Put in an AI key of your own and the wiki gets a chat that answers from its own pages and helps you report bugs, and both designers get a Draft with AI button that writes a breed or a gene from a description or a picture. It is optional, it costs nothing with a free OpenRouter key, and until you add a key nothing is sent anywhere.

Tools AI helpers Put in an AI key of your own and the wiki gets a chat that answers from its own pages and helps you report bugs, and both designers get a Draft with AI button that writes a breed or a gene from a description or a picture. It is optional, it costs nothing with a free OpenRouter key, and until you add a key nothing is sent anywhere. Your key stays in your browser There is no server of ours in the middle. The key is saved in this browser’s storage and goes straight to the provider you pick, with each message. Nobody else sees it, including the mod’s author. Forget key removes it, and Forget everything removes every key, the GitHub token and your model choices. Your key Every page of this wiki uses what you save here. It stays in this browser on this device, so a phone and a computer each need it put in once. What it does The chat. The Ask button in the bottom corner of every page. Each question is matched against the wiki, and the best passages go to the AI along with the page you are reading, so its answers come from the wiki and link back to it. It can be wrong. The pages it links to are the real answer. Bug reports. Press Report a bug in the chat, or just describe what went wrong. It asks for what the developer will need, one or two questions at a time, and checks the known gaps as it goes. When it has enough, the report turns into a form: you read it, fix anything, and send it. It never files anything on its own. See below for how sending works. Draft with AI in the breed designer . Describe a breed (“small mountain ponies, mostly dun, good jumpers, snowy taiga”), or attach a photo of the horses you want. The AI writes the breed file. The game’s own breed parser checks it, and anything it rejects goes back to the AI to fix, up to three times. You only get offered a file the game will load. Use it puts it in the designer, and Put back what I had undoes that. Draft with AI in the gene creator . The same for a gene: “a silver frost over the back and hips”, or a picture of a coat. It is checked against the creator’s own rules, and drawn once, before you are offered it. Pictures. Only models that can see images get them. The model list says which those are, and you are told when a picture was left out. Big photos are shrunk before sending. Small ones, like a 64-pixel coat sheet, are blown up pixel-sharp so the AI can make them out. A free key from OpenRouter OpenRouter gives you one key for hundreds of AI models from many companies, and some of those models are free. It is the default here. The quick way: press Connect with OpenRouter in the form above . OpenRouter opens, you sign in or sign up (with Google, GitHub or an email address), approve, and you land back here with the key already saved. That only works on the published wiki, not on a copy opened as a file. The manual way: sign up at openrouter.ai , open Settings Keys , press Create key , give it a name (and a credit limit, if you like), and copy it. It starts sk-or- . Paste it into API key above and press Save . Leave the model on Any free model ( openrouter/free ) , which sends each request to whichever free model is available, or pick one from the list. Models marked free cost nothing. Those marked sees images can read the pictures you attach. Press Test it . If it answers, you are done. The catch with free models is a limit on how much you can ask. When this page was written, OpenRouter allowed 20 requests a minute and 50 a day on free models, or 1,000 a day once an account had bought at least $10 of credit. A Draft with AI that needs fixing uses a request per try. Free models are often hosted by companies that may keep what you send, so check a model’s page on OpenRouter if that matters to you. With paid credit you can pick any model on the list. What a draft costs on a paid model. Each Draft with AI try sends the format page, the gene list and two example files along with your words: about 30,000 tokens. On a mid-priced model that is a few cents a try, and on the priciest ones it is more. A chat message is far smaller, a few thousand tokens. Using another provider A web page can only talk to an AI company whose service accepts requests straight from a browser. Many do not, because a key in a web page is usually a mistake. It is not here, since the key is your own and stays in your browser. The providers below all accepted a browser’s request when they were checked (13 September 2026). Pick one in the form , paste its key, and choose a model from the list that loads. Provider Where to get a key Good to know OpenRouter openrouter.ai/settings/keys Free models; one key reaches Claude, GPT, Gemini, Llama, Mistral and more. Anthropic (Claude) platform.claude.com/settings/keys Paid, with billing set up first. Every Claude model can see images. Defaults to Claude Opus 5; the list has the cheaper ones. OpenAI platform.openai.com/api-keys Paid. A ChatGPT subscription is not an API key — the API is billed separately. Groq console.groq.com/keys Very fast open models, with a free tier. Mistral console.mistral.ai/api-keys Has a free tier for trying things out. DeepSeek platform.deepseek.com/api_keys Cheap; its models read text only. xAI (Grok) console.x.ai Paid. Together AI api.together.ai/settings/api-keys Many open models. Not usable from here: Google’s own Gemini API turned the browser’s request away when checked, so use Gemini through OpenRouter instead. Anything that needs a cloud account’s credentials (Azure, Amazon Bedrock, Google Vertex) cannot work from a web page either. A ChatGPT Plus, Claude Pro or Gemini subscription is not a key and cannot be used at all. A model on your own computer Pick Another OpenAI-compatible server and give its address. For LM Studio , start its local server with CORS switched on in the server settings, and use http://localhost:1234/v1 . For Ollama , use http://localhost:11434/v1 and start it with OLLAMA_ORIGINS set to allow this site. Some browsers will not let a page on the internet reach your own computer. If yours refuses, open the wiki from a local copy instead. Bug reports and GitHub Reports go to the mod’s issue tracker, github.com/9-7-8/Procedural-Horse-Coats/issues . Before you send, the form lists issues that already look similar, so a problem that is already reported can get a comment instead of a second report. Without a GitHub token (the default): Open it on GitHub opens GitHub’s new-issue page in a new tab with the title and text filled in. You need a GitHub account; check the text and press Submit new issue . A very long log gets cut to fit in the link, and the report says so, so paste the rest in there. With a token , File it on GitHub sends it for you, under your own GitHub name, and links to it. To make one: Open github.com/settings/tokens/new (a classic token). Name it something like “Horse wiki bug reports” and pick a short expiry, such as 30 days. Tick public_repo and nothing else. Press Generate token , copy it (it starts ghp_ ), paste it into the GitHub token box in the form , and press Save . That token can open issues, and change code, in any public repository you have access to, acting as you. That is why the expiry should be short, and why you should press Forget token when you are done. GitHub’s newer fine-grained tokens are tied to repositories you own, so they are not a reliable way to file on somebody else’s. What gets sent where To the AI provider you picked: your messages and any pictures you attach. With them go passages of this wiki that match the conversation, and up to a few thousand characters of the page you are on. In the designers it also gets the file you have open (if you are changing it), the format page, the gene list and two of the mod’s own breed or gene files as examples. What happens to it after that is up to that provider’s policy. To GitHub: a search for similar issues when a report is ready, and the report itself, only when you send it. Kept in this browser: your keys, the model choices and the GitHub token, until you forget them. The current conversation is also kept, without its pictures, but only until the tab is closed. Never: anything to the mod’s author, other than an issue you send yourself. A key saved in a browser can be read by anyone who can use that browser profile, and by any browser extension allowed to read pages. Use a key with a spending limit (OpenRouter and most providers let you set one), and forget it on a shared computer. How it is built Three files in wiki/ai/ , all classic scripts with no build step: ai-core.js handles the provider list, the settings in localStorage , streaming replies from both request formats (the /chat/completions one most providers speak, and Anthropic’s Messages API), the model lists, picture shrinking, looking things up in the wiki, GitHub, the OpenRouter sign-in, the settings form and the Draft with AI dialog. wiki/nav.js loads it on every page; index.html and both designers load it themselves. ai-chat.js is the bubble and its panel. ai.css styles both. Everything sits under .phc-ai with its own colours, because it appears on pages that share no stylesheet. The wiki as context. The chat uses the same index as the search box ( wiki/search-index.js ), scored differently. A chat message is a sentence, so a passage earns points for each word it has, rather than being dropped for missing one. The designers send whole pages out of that index, breed-format.html and the file and mask sections of making-a-gene.html , so the format the AI is told is exactly what the wiki says, with no second copy to fall out of date. The draft loop. The breed designer checks a reply with checkBreedJson . That is the real BreedSpecParser , compiled to WebAssembly, so “the AI’s file loads” means the game loads it. The gene creator checks with its own validation and a trial bake. A reply that fails goes back to the model with the error message, up to three times. Adding a provider. First check that it answers a browser: curl -X OPTIONS <its chat endpoint> -H "Origin: https://9-7-8.github.io" -H "Access-Control-Request-Method: POST" -H "Access-Control-Request-Headers: authorization,content-type" -i must come back with an access-control-allow-origin header. Then add a row to PROVIDERS in ai-core.js and to the table above .
