The breed file format
(Reference / data-driven breeds)
A breed is a JSON file , not a Java class. Every breed the mod ships is one, in common/src/main/resources/horsegenetics/breeds/ ; a breed you write goes in .minecraft/phc/breeds/ and needs no rebuild — just the jar. The breed designer walks through a breed one step at a time, validates the file with the game’s own parser and shows the horses it makes as you go; this page is what it is writing.

Reference / data-driven breeds The breed file format A breed is a JSON file , not a Java class. Every breed the mod ships is one, in common/src/main/resources/horsegenetics/breeds/ ; a breed you write goes in .minecraft/phc/breeds/ and needs no rebuild — just the jar. The breed designer walks through a breed one step at a time, validates the file with the game’s own parser and shows the horses it makes as you go; this page is what it is writing. A breed that doesn’t fit — one that needs behaviour rather than a table of numbers — can still be written in Java against Breed.Builder and registered with Breeds.registerJava . That escape hatch is deliberately narrow, and the only thing shipping through it is Feral Mixed , which is the absence of a breed rather than one. A breed that is a set of genes, biomes, bands and numbers must be a file: a Java one cannot be edited by a player, shared between installs, or opened in the designer. The shipped files are inside the jar, so a world changes them another way: .minecraft/phc/breed-spawning.toml overrides each one’s biomes, weight and hours, or switches it off ( breeds ). It never touches a drop-in breed — that is already a file you can edit. The shape { "id": "friesian", "name": "Friesian", "country": "netherlands", "description": "Jet black, heavily feathered, and built to carry a knight.", "kind": "natural", "commonness": "uncommon", "spawn": ["wild", "cowboy", "spawn_egg", "stable"], "spawn_time": "any", "biomes": ["minecraft:forest", "minecraft:plains"], "price": [8, 14], "stats": { "speed": 5, "jump": 5, "health": 7, "size": [0.95, 1.24], "pull": 7 }, "genes": { "horsegenetics.extension": [ { "pair": "E/E", "weight": 62 }, { "pair": "E/e", "weight": 33 } ], "horsegenetics.agouti": [ { "pair": "a/a", "weight": 100 } ] }, "bands": { "horsegenetics.ednrb": { "cover": [0.55, 0.80] }, "horsegenetics.agate": { "hue": 210, "cellSeed": "-4127755610044201371" } }, "notes": ["Lower-leg feathering - not modelled."] } Only id and name are required. Every other field may be left out, and leaving one out is not the same as writing a zero into it — the table below is what the game does with an absent field. The designer never pre-fills a default into a box for exactly that reason: a filled box says somebody chose the value, which would be a lie. Every field, and what a blank one means Field Shape Left out… id lower-case token, unique required. splice and feral_mixed are reserved by the breed-label system and refused. name display string required. country lower-case token none, and a blank one is a real answer — it means the breed comes from nowhere on earth. Where in the real world the breed is from, spelled like an id ( united_states , mexico , saudi_arabia ) rather than as a display name, because it is meant to be keyed on and not only printed. A capital letter is an error rather than a warning, for the same reason. It must be a nation, never a region (owner, 2026-09-15): not maghreb , not arabian_peninsula , not scandinavia . A breed that genuinely spans several countries is pinned to the one it is most associated with — the Barb to morocco , the Arabian to saudi_arabia — because the mechanic this feeds keys on a country and a region token would simply never match. description a sentence or two none. What the in-game breed book (the Breeds tab of the H menu) shows about the breed, under “About”. kind "natural" or "magical" natural . A label, not a mechanic — what makes a breed magical in play is the genes in its pool. magical_variant true or false true , and never written when true. false means the breed never has magical herds . herd {"bachelor_chance": 0.3, "traditional": {"stallions": 1, "mares": [2, 4]}, "bachelor": {"stallions": [3, 5], "mares": 0}} How its new wild herds are founded — see the shape of a founded herd below. Every part is optional and none is written when it matches the game's own. bachelor_chance outside 0 … 1 , or a negative or fractional count, is an error rather than a warning. commonness one of the seven tiers, extremely_common … very_rare moderate . Each step is a doubling; see Commonness . spawn_weight a raw number, instead of a tier the tier above. Naming both is an error. spawn a checklist of wild , cowboy , spawn_egg , stable all four. [] is a real answer — it means the breed comes from nowhere at all — and is not the same as leaving the field out. spawn_time "any" , "day" or "night" any . When its wild herds may be founded - see where a breed may come from . biomes namespaced biome ids - any biome, modded ones included none, so the breed never heads a wild herd wherever spawn says. spawn_ground namespaced block ids - any block, modded ones included none, so the breed spawns only where vanilla already allows it: on a lit minecraft:grass_block . Naming blocks here lets its herds stand on those too - see where a breed may come from . Purely additive; grass keeps working either way. spawn_in_dark true or false false . true waives the light requirement over the blocks named in spawn_ground only , never over grass. It is a hard error without spawn_ground , since on its own it would quietly change every biome the breed names. price [min, max] emeralds HorsePrices.DEFAULT_PRICE , which owns the number. What a signed transfer paper for one costs at the cowboy’s, rolled per horse inside the range. stats speed , jump , health and pull as 1–10 scores (a number or [lo, hi] ); size as a multiple of an ordinary horse, a number or [lo, hi] — see size and pull every axis wild , which is not the same as a score of 5 — see BreedStatCurve ’s near-baseline rule. genes gene key weighted { "pair": "E/e", "weight": 44 } entries the locus is rolled wild if it paints, and left at its global founder rate if it does not. A pool on one of the five body-stat genes wins over stats for that axis. strains an array of { "name": "White", "weight": 1, "stats": { … }, "genes": { … } } ; each genes is read exactly as the top-level one, and each stats exactly as the top-level stats — see a strain that scores its own stats none. Each founder picks one strain by weight, and every gene the strain names is drawn from its pool instead of the breed’s — so a whole founder is this or that , never half of each. A gene named only by another strain rolls as unnamed. See strains ; the Dhampir file is the worked example. The breed designer carries strains through import and export but has no editor for them yet. bands gene key value name [lo, hi] , a single number (a lock), or for a seed a string of digits no number pinned; founders roll from the value’s own design range. notes strings none. They only surface on the breeds page . Two kinds of wrongness, treated differently A malformed file is thrown; a missing gene is warned and skipped A gene file is parsed strictly — an unknown key is an error — because the creator writes those and an unknown key means the tool and the game disagree. A breed file is different, because a breed is mostly a list of references to other people’s genes. So: a file that is wrong (no id , an unknown key, a weight that is not a number) is thrown, reported by file name, and the other files still load. A file that names something this install has not got — a gene from a pack you are not running, an allele token that gene no longer declares, an epigenetic value that was renamed — is warned about in the log and that locus alone is dropped. The breed still loads. That is the whole point of the distinction: a breed written for a bigger modpack has to degrade to the horses this install can actually make, rather than vanishing. Gene pools A pool is a weighted table of allele pairs. Weights are relative , so 62 / 33 / 5 and 0.62 / 0.33 / 0.05 are the same breed; the designer shows the share each one works out to, because a weight of 44 means nothing until you know what the others add up to. ( Breed.founderTable scales them to the percentages a FounderTable takes, so any total is fine.) A pool is exactly which pairs the breed may have. Name only heterozygotes and every founder is a carrier; include the wild pair and its weight is the share of founders that do not show the gene at all. The designer’s gene card is this table with a tick box per pair. Size stats.size is a multiple of an ordinary horse : 1.0 is a vanilla-sized horse (15.3 hands on the info screen), a Falabella runs about [0.38, 0.51] and a Clydesdale [1.14, 1.43] . The range is the body-scale band; nothing is converted. It was written in hands until 2026-09-10, and every shipped file was converted through the old curve ( BreedStatCurve.sizeForHands ), so no breed changed size. The genes follow from the size. Each founder's size is drawn inside the range first, and then: between 0.7x and 1.3x it carries one copy of the size allele and the wild type, with the whole distance on that copy; outside it, two , sharing it. So the giants and the miniatures breed true, and a breed of ordinary-ish horses throws some variety among its foals. A range across 1.3 produces both kinds of founder. See BreedStatCurve.heterozygousSize ; the rule applies to every breed, shipped or dropped in. Naming a locus replaces what BreedFounder would otherwise do with it. It does not mean the horse shows that gene: a Suffolk Punch fixed e/e at extension still carries and transmits agouti, it just cannot show it. Pools are about what a line passes on , which is a different question from what it looks like. Every gene the breed does not name is handled for it. Coat genes and the modifiers a coat gene reads ( Gene.coatDependsOn() ) are forced wild , so a breed cannot leak a pattern it never asked for. So is every magical gene and every disorder ( HealthContribution ): a breed is exactly its sheet, with no stray magic and no background disorder rate. A breed that should sometimes carry a disorder names it, with the clear pair at the larger weight. The five body-stat genes come from stats ; the natural performance genes keep their wild roll. Only Feral Mixed , the unbred population, rolls everything at random. Pull stats.pull is how much the breed’s horses can shift, scored 1–10 like speed, jump and health — a draught breed writes "pull": 10 , a miniature "pull": 1 . It is the one score with no curve between the sheet and the horse : where the other three scores are run through a multiplier ceiling ( BreedStatCurve.factor ), pullBand is the number itself, padded out, and a founder resolves to it. Pulling ability is stored on the same 1–10 scale the sheet is written in, so there is nothing to convert. The near-baseline rule is tighter here, and has to be: BreedStatCurve.PULL_NEUTRAL drops a score within 0.4 of an ordinary horse’s 5, because 4 and 6 are ordinary scores on these sheets and both have to survive. A breed that wrote "pull": 5 and a breed that left pull out produce the same horse, with the locus left wild; the difference is only whether the sheet says the 5 was a decision. A strain that scores its own stats A strains[] entry may carry its own stats block, in exactly the shape of the breed’s. It is laid over the breed’s axis by axis rather than replacing it ( Breed.StatScores.overlaidWith ), so a strain writes only what it differs on and stays silent about the rest; the founder roll picks the strain before it reads any band. Most strains name nothing here and are pure gene pools. "strains": [ { "name": "White", "weight": 1, "stats": { "pull": 9 }, "genes": { ... } }, { "name": "Seal brown", "weight": 9, "stats": { "pull": 6 }, "genes": { ... } } ] That is the Dhampir , and it is why the block exists. Its other magical stats travel as a Vmp allele, where one copy is worth half of two — but 9 is four times as far above the baseline as 6 is, and two copies of anything are only ever worth twice one . Copy count cannot say “nine and six”, a per-strain score can, and that is the reason magic pull has no vampiric allele of its own. Epigenetic bands A band is the difference between “Friesians are black” (a pool) and “Friesians are deeply black” (a number). Each gene declares named numbers on every allele copy — how far a splash covers, how wide a dorsal stripe is — and a breed may pin any of them to a closed range. Each founder is given a point inside it on both copies, drawn separately so its two gametes are not interchangeable. From there it is ordinary epigenetics. It inherits, it drifts, and nothing pulls it back: a breed shapes the horses it starts with and then lets go. Keeping a line to a standard is the player’s job, not the game’s. A single number is a lock : every founder is given exactly that value on both copies. That is what a seed takes - a seed is the long behind a noise field, and two neighbouring seeds draw unrelated fields, so there is no range to give; locking one means every founder of the breed carries the same pattern . Write a seed as a string of digits ( "-4127755610044201371" ), because a JSON number is a double and cannot hold most seeds exactly; a small one may be a plain number. A category - an index into a list the gene owns - is banded over whole options, both ends included. Two things a band will not do, each warned about rather than silently ignored. The five body-stat genes are owned by stats , which knows about scores, sizes and which allele is the pushing one, so a band naming one of them is refused. And a value the gene does not declare is dropped the same way an unknown gene is. Where a breed may come from spawn is a checklist rather than a mode, because the four are genuinely independent. “A breed the cowboy has heard of but that no longer runs wild” is ["cowboy", "spawn_egg"] ; “a collector’s breed that only exists as an egg” is ["spawn_egg"] ; “a landrace nobody farms” is ["wild"] . None of those is a special case in any of the four consumers — each just asks Breed.allows . Dropping spawn_egg is the “opt out of having a spawn egg” switch: no breed spawn egg exists for that breed, it cannot turn up in dungeon loot, and the scientist never stocks one. Wild herds turn up in every biome a wild breed names , modded ones included. The mod's herd spawn is a biome modifier of its own ( BreedHerdsBiomeModifier ) that adds the spawn to its listed vanilla biomes and to every biome a registered breed lists - so a breed dropped into the folder that lives in a dark forest or a modded biome gets herds there on the next start. A named biome is not automatically a liveable one. Vanilla's animal rule tests the position , not the biome: the block underfoot must be in #minecraft:animals_spawnable_on - which in this SDK is the single entry minecraft:grass_block - and the raw brightness must be above 8. So a desert breed is rarely seen, and a breed in a biome with no grass at all was never seen: the two Nether breeds named five biomes each, had the spawn duly added to all ten, and could not spawn in any of them. spawn_ground is the answer. List the blocks the breed's herds may stand on and they may stand on those as well as on lit grass; add spawn_in_dark and the light test is waived over those blocks only . Both are additive - they can only ever let a horse spawn somewhere it previously could not, which is why they need no migration and no setting to switch off. Emptying the list is the off switch. The host half is HorseSpawnGround , which adds the rule to EntityType.HORSE with Operation.OR so vanilla's own rule keeps running underneath it. "biomes": [ "minecraft:nether_wastes", "minecraft:crimson_forest", "minecraft:warped_forest", "minecraft:soul_sand_valley", "minecraft:basalt_deltas" ], "spawn_ground": [ "minecraft:netherrack", "minecraft:crimson_nylium", "minecraft:warped_nylium", "minecraft:soul_sand", "minecraft:soul_soil", "minecraft:basalt", "minecraft:blackstone", "minecraft:magma_block" ], "spawn_in_dark": true That is the Netherhorse 's and the Nightmare 's block, verbatim, and the two share it deliberately: as far as the ground is concerned they are one founder pool. Eight blocks rather than just netherrack because the generator lays all eight down as a surface somewhere in those five biomes. Herds in a biome the modifier reaches only because a breed named it are also thinner than herds in its own listed biomes - breed_weight rather than weight in data/horsegenetics/neoforge/biome_modifier/add_horse_herds.json . Without that, unblocking the Nether would have made two very rare breeds the commonest animal down there, since the Nether has almost no other land CREATURE spawn to compete with. spawn_time is checked when a herd is founded : outside its hours the breed is not a candidate and the biome's other breeds share the draw. It only speaks for wild . Vanilla will not spawn an animal in the dark on a chunk near a player, so a night breed's herds mostly come from chunks generated at night. spawn_time and spawn_in_dark are different questions , and easy to confuse. spawn_time is the world clock , read when a herd is founded: “this breed's herds form at night”. spawn_in_dark is block light at the spawn position , read by the placement test: “this breed does not need a lit floor”. A Nether breed wants the flag and has no opinion on the hour; the Dhampir wants spawn_time: night and still needs lit grass. The shape of a founded herd The herd block says how a breed's new wild herds are put together ( BreedHerd ). Every part is optional, and a part that matches the game's own answer is never written: "herd": { "bachelor_chance": 0.3, "traditional": { "stallions": 1, "mares": [2, 4] }, "bachelor": { "stallions": [3, 5], "mares": 0 } } bachelor_chance — the share of its new herds founded as a band of stallions rather than a stallion with mares. 0.3 by default; 1 means the breed is only ever found in single-sex bands, 0 that it never is. traditional / bachelor — how many stallions and mares that kind of band wants. Each is a number or an inclusive [lo, hi] . A count is a preference, not a request for more horses The game spawns the pack before the breed is chosen. How many horses appear is a biome modifier's business ( add_horse_herds.json — two to six, the same for every breed); only then does HerdManager elect a lead, derive the breed from the lead's seed, and found a herd over the clump standing there. So the sexes are honoured exactly — nothing has read them yet, and the assignment is made over the whole clump at once from the lead's seed, which is why every member agrees on who is a stallion without talking to each other. The counts are clamped by however many horses turned up: ask for four mares and a pack of three gives you two. Nothing is ever padded out by spawning extra horses — that was considered and left out (owner, 2026-09-15). Where the clump cannot satisfy everything, the precedence is the stallion range first, then the mare maximum (so a bachelor band never grows a mare at any size), then the mare minimum — last, because the only way to insist on a mare that did not spawn would be to spawn one. A band with no herd block caps its harem at four mares ( BreedHerd.MAX_HAREM_MARES , 2026-09-17). That is a real ceiling and not a preference: past it the surplus turns stallion when the band is founded, and a horse joining the band later rolls a coin instead of being made a mare. It was unlimited before, which is what made wild horses overwhelmingly female. BreedHerdTest pins both sides of that ceiling — a full harem is still one stallion's, and every adult past it is another stallion. It had been asserting the old uncapped answer since the cap went in, and sat red on a clean tree until 2026-09-18; the test was the stale one, not BreedHerd . Two things the block deliberately does not touch. Foals are vanilla's : a horse that spawned as a baby stays one and takes a coin-flip sex. And a founded band has no family relations — every member is a parentless founder with an independently rolled genome, so a foal in a band is nobody's foal ( roadmap §15 ). It is asked once, at founding. What a band becomes afterwards belongs to BandLife — colts leave for bachelor bands, challengers take harems over, mares drift between bands — so none of this is a claim about what a herd looks like an hour later. See bands on the breeds page and band life . Loading, and the order it happens in The mod reads the files it ships (listed in index.json , because a jar has no directory to walk) and then everything in .minecraft/phc/breeds/ (the game directory - an instance folder, for any launcher but the vanilla one), in filename order. The folder and a README in it are made the first time the game starts with the mod installed, and the Breeds tab of the H menu has an Open breeds folder button. An id that collides with one already loaded is ignored, and said so. It happens after the drop-in genes load, and that ordering is why it is an explicit call rather than a static initialiser: a breed file is mostly references to genes, and loading breeds first would report every drop-in gene as missing. A breed does not change the genotype code Adding or removing a gene lengthens the code and invalidates every horse already saved. Adding or removing a breed costs nothing: it is a label and a set of founder rules, and no horse stores it beyond the token on its record. That is what makes breeds the safe thing for a player to fiddle with. Regenerating the shipped files The files under common/src/main/resources/horsegenetics/breeds/ and the browser’s single-array copy at wiki/horse-designer/assets/breeds.json are one generated artefact with two spellings, written by ./gradlew :common:bakeBreedFiles . The wiki tools read the second because a WebAssembly build cannot walk a classpath. BreedFilesTest is what stops them going stale quietly: it checks every shipped file is exactly what a fresh bake would write, that the index lists all of them, and that the browser bundle holds the same breeds in the same order. A new or edited breed also moves the gene census The gene census carries a which breeds carry this column, and it is read straight off the breed sheets — every genes pool, and every strain's. So adding a breed, deleting one, or changing one pair in one pool changes that page, and the change does not arrive until ./gradlew :common:bakeGeneCensus is run. Nothing guards this one. BreedFilesTest protects the shipped files and the browser bundle from going stale; there is no equivalent for the census, so a stale breed column is silent — and it fails in the direction that matters, because the column exists to find blank spots . A gene a new breed now carries would keep reading as carried by nobody, which is the one answer somebody would act on. Changing the format lands in four places BreedSpecParser — reading it, including which blank means what. BreedSpecWriter — writing it back, omitting the field when it is at its default. The two must agree or the round-trip test fails. wiki/breed-designer/js/ — bd-core.js (the state, which is the file, and toJson / fromJson ) and bd-steps.js (the step that sets the field). this page. Then re-run ./gradlew :common:bakeBreedFiles , because a field that has changed shape changes every shipped file. Unlike the gene creator there is no parity check to run: the designer validates with the game’s own parser compiled to WebAssembly, so there is no second implementation to drift. Breed designer Breeds Gene file format Breeding & pedigree Items Source: common/breed/spec/ , common/breed/Breed.java , neoforge-26.1.2/ModBreedSpecs.java
