Coding notes
(Project / how to work on this codebase)
The working notebook. Everything here was learned by getting it wrong first, and none of it belongs to a single system, so none of it has an owning page — it is technique and cross-cutting traps rather than how any one gene or class behaves. This page has no line budget, unlike CLAUDE.md , which is why it exists.

Project / how to work on this codebase Coding notes The working notebook. Everything here was learned by getting it wrong first, and none of it belongs to a single system, so none of it has an owning page — it is technique and cross-cutting traps rather than how any one gene or class behaves. This page has no line budget, unlike CLAUDE.md , which is why it exists. What goes here, and what does not The routing table at the top of CLAUDE.md still governs. This page is not an escape hatch for material that already has a home, and a note that duplicates one of those pages is worse than no note, because it is a second source of truth that nobody will remember to update: What a session built session log . A defect or an unchecked assumption known gaps . How a mask, op or header field behaves gene format . An API quirk of this SDK API notes . What the phases do the pipeline . What lands here is the residue: how to find out , how to know a check is real , and the handful of traps that live in the gaps between those pages, where each individual page is correct and the interaction between two of them is not. Measure it; do not reason about it Reasoning about body space has been wrong more often than it has been right. The coat pipeline is a stack of coordinate transforms, and every one of them is individually simple enough to feel like it can be held in the head — which is exactly why the errors survive: a wrong mental model produces a confident, specific, testable claim, and it takes a measurement to notice that it is false. The cheap instrument is a throwaway probe : a test, or a gene file, that paints the quantity in question and is deleted afterwards. Two that have paid for themselves repeatedly: A four-band FLAT probe settles any question about where a body region actually lands on the sheet, in one render. Reasoning about it was wrong three times in a single day; the probe has never been wrong. A reading test — paint nothing, print the channel — settles questions about what a mask sees . The LUMA table below came from one, and every number in it contradicted a guess that had already been written down as fact. The rule that generalises: when a claim is about a number the code can print, print it. The probe costs a few minutes and the wrong guess costs an evening, and the guess is more expensive when it is nearly right, because a nearly-right coat looks like a different bug. A related discipline for coats specifically: after changing a painter, look at a side-view grid of rendered horses rather than at the numbers. Band measurements have agreed with a horse that was visibly wrong at least twice — the measurement answers the question you asked, not the question of whether the horse looks right. A green check is not evidence until you have watched it go red This project has now been bitten three separate ways by a gate that reported success while checking nothing. They are worth listing together, because the failure looks identical from outside in all three cases — a tool prints a large number of passing checks — and the causes have nothing in common. The oracle was stale. check-parity.mjs compares the creator's JavaScript against expected.json , which is a checked-in snapshot of the Java . Forget to re-bake it and the file agrees with the JavaScript by definition. A swapped UV pair hid behind this for a day while the creator drew every horse with its spine and belly patches exchanged. The oracle was absent. check-parity.mjs runs restrict() and tint() and has never run compose() — the magical cases are seeded with a synthetic flat colour rather than resolved through a chart. So the whole composite path had no net at all, and the creator drew every dark coat at full opacity for months ( gap 50 ). The gate looked comprehensive and had a hole the exact size of the bug. The corpus could not discriminate. The invert/parts fix was covered by parity and parity stayed green — because no example gene had a layer whose output differed between the two semantics. The check ran, the comparison was real, and the inputs could not tell the two answers apart. The probe could not reach the detail. The GOO mask (2026-09-11) went in with a layer in prismatic.json , and the gate was watched go red twice - a port returning zero fails 43 checks, a missing end-face wrap fails one. Then two subtle disagreements were tried: multiplying the field by 0.98, and changing the sag bite from 1.4 to 1.1. Both stayed green, because the fixture samples four texels per part and none of them sits in the soft edge or between two drips. The lesson is not "parity is useless" but that a gate's worth is the smallest error it can see , and that number is only known by trying one. See gap 194 . The countermeasure for all three is the same, and it is cheap: deliberately regress the thing the check guards, and confirm the check fails. Then put it back. If it does not fail, the check is decorative and you have just learned that for the price of one edit. Both recent additions were accepted this way and not before: reintroducing the old rgb === 0 equality made three composer checks fail, one of them on #161515 exactly; regressing the JavaScript twin's invert order made 264 parity checks fail. Neither number was predictable in advance , which is the point — had either come back as zero, the fix would have shipped with a check that proved nothing. The deeper limit, which no amount of this fixes: parity cannot see a mirrored bug. The two engines agreeing is not either of them being right. Parity catches drift between Java and JavaScript; it says nothing about whether the Java is correct, and a bug introduced into both at once is invisible to it forever. A green boot is not a clean boot — grep for missing models, not errors A block whose model id does not resolve draws as the purple-and-black cube and logs at WARN : grep -c "Missing block model" run/logs/latest.log Nothing about it is an ERROR or a FATAL . A boot can report zero of both and still be missing a hundred models — which is exactly what happened on 2026-09-20: 104 missing jump models across two builds, reported as clean boots both times, because the grep was for /ERROR\] . Add this one to the boot check. And the repo tool cannot catch it either check-block-models.mjs walks every blockstate and item definition and asserts the model ids named in them exist. It passed through that entire bug, twice, because every id named in the blockstate was real — the broken one was composed in Java , one layer past anything the checker reads. So: whenever a model id is built by concatenation at run time — JumpModel does it for woods, connection states and crossrail slices — the checker is not covering you and the log is the only thing that is. The decompiled sources jar is not the API — javap the real one neoforge-26.1.2/build/moddev/artifacts/minecraft-patched-<version>-sources.jar is the obvious place to look up a vanilla signature, and it is right almost all of the time. Almost. On 2026-09-18 it showed public class BannerFlagModel extends Model<Float> { public final ModelPart flag; …and on the strength of that, an access-transformer line widening BannerFlagModel.flag was deleted as redundant. It is private in the jar the compiler actually reads , and the deletion cost two compile errors. The line is back, with a comment on it saying the sources lie about this field so nobody tidies it away twice. Treat the sources jar as a readable copy, good for understanding what a method does and for finding the name of something you half-remember. When the question is "what exactly can I call, and is it public" , ask the compiled artefact: # the class you are compiling against javap -cp neoforge-26.1.2/build/moddev/artifacts/minecraft-patched-26.1.2.100.jar \ net.minecraft.client.color.block.BlockTintSource # NeoForge's own classes are in a different jar entirely javap -cp ~/.gradle/caches/modules-2/files-2.1/net.neoforged/neoforge/<ver>/<hash>/neoforge-<ver>-universal.jar \ 'net.neoforged.neoforge.client.event.RegisterColorHandlersEvent$BlockTintSources' There is no javap on this machine's PATH — it lives in the JDK Gradle provisioned, under ~/.gradle/jdks/ . A NeoForge inner class needs the $ form, and single quotes in bash so the shell leaves it alone. The universal jar carries no sources at all, so for NeoForge's own API javap is often the only answer available without a network. Three more from the same afternoon All four of these compiled fine in a version that did not have them, which is to say they were guesses from memory of an older Minecraft and the compiler was the only thing that said so: BannerModel.getChildPart (it is Model.root().getChild(…) ), ItemNameBlockItem (gone — vanilla builds wheat_seeds as a plain BlockItem with useItemDescriptionPrefix() ), BlockBehaviour.Properties.noCollission (one s ), and RegisterColorHandlersEvent.Block (it is BlockTintSources , and it takes a list of one-method BlockTintSource rather than the per-tint-index lambda older versions took). The cheap habit: when writing against a vanilla or NeoForge class this repo has never touched before, javap it first . It costs one command and it is faster than a compile round-trip, let alone four. A mixin cannot inject into a method the target class does not declare HorseTwoRidersMixin injected at the head of AbstractHorse.canAddPassenger . It compiled. Every check was green — check-recipes , check-progress-tasks , check-links , the unit tests, the full build . The server refused to boot : Critical injection failure: @Inject annotation on horsegenetics$allowPillion could not find any targets matching 'canAddPassenger' in AbstractHorse AbstractHorse does not declare it. The method is on Entity , four classes up, and a mixin injector can only target a method the target class actually has — inheritance does not count, because there is no bytecode in AbstractHorse to inject into. Two ways out. Mixin into the class that does declare it — here Entity , the hottest class in the game and one the access-transformer file already argues against touching — or add the override to the subclass from the mixin , which is what CartHorseMixin already does for maxUpStep . The second is correct whenever the method is small enough to reimplement: canAddPassenger 's entire vanilla body is this.passengers.isEmpty() , so generalising it to "fewer than one, or two if this horse is strong enough" is one expression and needs no cross-hierarchy super call for mixin to rewrite. Only runServer finds this class of error A mixin's targets are resolved when the class is transformed at load, not when it is compiled. So a wrong target, a wrong descriptor, a wrong injection point and a @Shadow on a field that does not exist are all invisible to the entire check suite and fatal at startup. This is the concrete reason a release is not tagged without a runServer boot — it is not a formality, it is the only test that runs the mixins at all. Scan the corpus before adding a refusal Adding a rule to GeneSpecParser is adding a rule to every gene file that already exists , and the parser runs at startup, so a refusal that trips a shipped gene is not a warning — it is a mod that will not load. The order that has worked is: Write the detector as a throwaway scan first and run it over horsegenetics/genes/ . Now the migration cost is a number rather than a surprise. If it is zero, the rule is free — prevention with no migration behind it, which is the cheapest possible moment to add it. Both recent refusals landed here: zero of 513 banded masks and zero of 130 knob-driven ones trip them. If it is not zero, fix the files in the same change , and say in the commit how many there were. A refusal added on top of known-broken files is a trap for whoever next runs the game. Two rules that look alike and are not, worth stating because the distinction is the whole reason one of them is exempt: A banded mask with its edges reversed is always a bug. AXIS , PIGMENT , LUMA and WAVES feed smoothstep , and smoothstep with edge1 <= edge0 is a hard step in the original direction . It does not reverse the ramp; it removes it. There is no author intent that this expresses. A RAMP with its ends reversed is a gradient the other way round , which is a thing somebody might mean. Its from / to are the ends of a linear interpolation, not the edges of a step, so it is deliberately exempt from the check above. And the test has to be possibility, not certainty . The worse of the two historical cases pointed to at a knob whose range straddled its own from : about half the horses drew reversed, and nothing about the file looked wrong on any single horse. A knob is a range, two knobs are drawn independently, and “this can come out reversed on some horses” is exactly the defect. Traps in the gaps between pages Each of these bit once, and in each case every individual page involved was correct — the defect was in the interaction, which is precisely why none of them has an owning page. Philosophy’s sections are cited by number, in prose, from code The philosophy page numbers its sections in the heading text — 1. Breeding should be a game of skill — and the rest of the project refers to them as §N in running prose : seven wiki pages and four Java files, including GameteBias , ArcaneStock and HorsePrices , whose comments say things like “§4 of the philosophy is that nothing in the model scores a horse”. So inserting or reordering a numbered section silently invalidates eleven references , in two languages, none of which is a link and none of which any checker can see — check-links.mjs verifies hrefs and fragments and a § in a sentence is neither. The page now carries an id on every heading ( #determinism , #player-goals , …), so cite a new reference by anchor and never by number . If a section genuinely has to be added, add it unnumbered the way “What this mod is for” was, or accept that renumbering means grepping both the wiki and common/ and neoforge-26.1.2/ for § and &sect; . A cache added for the world silently froze every GUI Coat-bake rationing gave GeneticHorseRenderState a resolved coatId and made getTextureLocation prefer it over the CoatData it used to read. Perfectly correct for a horse in the world, where extractRenderState computes both from the same coat. But four GUI screens assigned coatData after createRenderState and relied on the texture being derived from it afterwards. It no longer was, so every ancestor in a family tree, every foal preview and every browser entry drew the wild-type black horse — and nothing logged, threw, or looked broken enough to notice. The shape to watch for: caching a derived value next to the thing it was derived from, where somebody else writes the source afterwards. The two fields no longer move together and the stale one wins. The fix was not to fix four screens but to stop offering the broken half — GeneticHorseRenderer.applyCoat is now the only supported way to dress a render state, and it moves the coat and both texture ids at once. When you add a precomputed field beside an existing one, grep for every writer of the original before assuming the derivation still holds. Every layer of one compound element must share its stretch SPOTS divides the sample point by spacing × stretch before walking the lattice. Squashing the sample is what makes an oval — the cells stay round in the squashed frame and come out stretched on the horse — but it means a different stretch is a different lattice , with its cells in different places. For a single layer that does not matter. For a compound element built from several layers that are supposed to be concentric — a pupil inside an iris inside a sclera — it is fatal: give the layers different stretches and each one lands on its own grid, so the parts scatter instead of nesting. This produced a neck of drifting fragments that looked like a radius bug and was not. If layers must line up, every parameter feeding the lattice walk has to match , not just the seed. A mask's meaning depends on its position in the list The first mask of a layer defines the region; every later one modifies it. So “this mask does not apply here” resolves two different ways — coverage 0 in first position, and skip-it in any later one — and treating them alike breaks something either way. Collapsing both to “skip” made four genes paint everywhere they had excluded; collapsing both to 0 deleted galaxy's black field and tribal ward's pale one. The reasoning is written out in full in SpecPainter.coverage , at the branch itself , and that is the right place for it — the note here exists only so the shape of the mistake is findable from outside the file. A ground can be the only thing separating two alleles Removing a decorative ground from a gene is a one-line edit that can silently make two of its alleles byte-identical — if the “coloured” allele differed from the plain one only in the ground, taking the ground out takes the allele with it, and the gene still loads, still passes, and now has a duplicate. Shieldback and tribal ward both did this. The fix is to give the orphaned knob something else to point at, usually the marking itself. After removing a ground, diff the alleles ; the coat bake golden will catch it, but only if you read which rows moved rather than just re-baking. Sub-texel features are arithmetically present and invisible TEXELS_PER_UNIT is 2, so anything under about half a body unit does not survive to the sheet. This is the commonest way a gene comes out blank and it never looks like a scale problem. It has a proper treatment on the gene format page ; it is listed here only because it is the first thing to rule out when a new gene draws nothing. What the chart actually reads — measured, not assumed LUMA asks what colour the gradient produced , not what pigment is behind it, which is the whole reason it exists: the LUT locus can hand a horse a chart whose black corner is violet, and that horse has identical pigment and is not black anywhere. So “find the black bits” is a question about the output , and the thresholds have to be measured against the shipped chart rather than reasoned about. These came from a reading probe on the shipped gradient. They are properties of that chart, not constants — if the gradient art is edited, re-measure before trusting any of them. Coat dark white saturation Black 0.807 — 0.02 Bay 0.782 — 0.556 Chestnut 0.599 — — Bald face white — 1.000 — Perlino — 0.871 — Old grey — 0.698 — Palomino — 0.475 — The useful finding is that one channel is not enough at either end. A black horse reads 0.807 on dark and a bay reads 0.782 — no threshold separates those without losing half the black, because the difference between them is colour , not brightness. saturation separates them immediately: 0.02 against 0.556. That is why Nyxborn's stars are dark AND unsaturated , and why a bay keeps its brown shoulder unstarred. The pale end has the mirror-image problem. A palomino is 0.475 on the achromatic floor while a bald face is 1.000, and both are “pale” — so a gene that means “the white markings” and a gene that means “wherever the coat is light” want different channels, and picking the wrong one gives a palomino a body-wide marking it should not have. “As black as possible” is #151515 The composite is a multiply over a shaded template, so a genuinely black texel would take the shading with it and flatten the horse into a silhouette. CoatTextureComposer therefore lifts shadows to a floor ( SHADOW_FLOOR , 0x15 ) and ramps opacity from PURE_BLACK_ALPHA at black up to fully opaque by NEAR_BLACK ( 0x30 ). Two consequences worth knowing before chasing a phantom bug: the blackest a horse gets is about #151515 , and a black coat bakes to roughly #161515 rather than #000000 — which is exactly what killed the creator's rgb === 0 equality. Never test a colour against pure black in this codebase. The mirrors, and how much of each is actually gated The spread-out contracts say which files to edit together. This is the complementary question, which is easier to get wrong: of the hand-written JavaScript ports of common/ , which ones does anything check? The answer has been “fewer than it looks” every time it has been asked. Mirror Of Gated by spec-engine.js SpecPainter Yes — the bulk of parity schema.js SpecSchema Yes — defaults compared noise.js BodyNoise Yes , via the engine's cases fields.js CoatTextureComposer Arithmetic only — new; the composite itself cannot be compared in Node, which has no image decoder for the gradient and template geometry.js + model3d.js HorseSkinGeometry No — gap 100 ; posed() exists twice, in two languages, in two files that are not obviously a pair The technique that closes one of these rows is now proven and cheap , which is the main thing worth recording: bake a table of Java's answers into expected.json from SpecFixtureTool , assert it in parity.js , then regress the twin to prove the table discriminates. Anything that is a pure function of numbers can be gated this way without teaching the Node harness to render. That is exactly how the composer's arithmetic went in, and gap 100 is the same shape — it needs emitPart exported and a table of posed corners, and it stops being an open question. Hard rule 3 still stands and is not in tension with any of this: do not write new ports. These five exist because the creator predates the WebAssembly build; the designer runs the real common/ via TeaVM. Anything new that needs genetics in the browser gets an @JSExport on DesignerApi , not a sixth mirror. The hidden attribute loses to any display: you write [hidden] { display: none } lives in the browser’s own stylesheet, and a user-agent rule is outranked by any author rule on the same element — specificity never enters into it. So el.hidden = true on something styled display: flex sets the attribute and changes nothing on screen. Every overlay here is a flex box, which makes this a trap with a queue. It has been found and patched locally three times before it was fixed once: .section-body[hidden] for the landing page’s collapsible sections, .phc-ai[hidden] for the AI panel (which “showed open on every load”), and finally the search overlay, which for some weeks could be opened on a phone and never closed — and was reported not as a stuck panel but as a search that ran forever, because a panel you cannot dismiss on a phone is the whole screen. Each patch fixed its own component and left the next one to rediscover it. There is now one rule at the top of wiki/styles.css , ahead of every layout rule, and wiki/ai/ai.css carries its own copy because the two designers do not load the wiki stylesheet. A new stylesheet needs that rule on day one. The symptom to recognise: toggling something works in one direction and not the other, the attribute is provably correct in the inspector, and the element is still on screen. Drive the browser tools; do not read them The wiki ships two programs — the gene creator, which runs the spec engine in JavaScript, and the horse designer, which runs common/ as WebAssembly — and no static checker reaches either. check-links.mjs can say the page exists; only a browser can say the page works . node wiki/tools/check-path-canvas.mjs # drive the PATH drawing canvas node wiki/tools/check-creator-steps.mjs # does every step show something to fill in? node wiki/tools/check-glow-control.mjs # a layer's glow, which nothing can draw node wiki/tools/check-glow-render.mjs # and whether three actually lights it node wiki/tools/check-colour-control.mjs # the literal / HSL fork, which looks fine either way node wiki/tools/check-ai.mjs # the wiki helper, both providers, both designers node wiki/tools/check-designer-boots.mjs # did the wasm instantiate at all? No Puppeteer, and no dependency at all. Node 24 has a WebSocket and Chrome has --remote-debugging-port , which between them is the whole harness — wiki/tools/chrome.mjs , about forty lines. Adding a devDependency to a repo whose tools are all zero-install would cost more than writing them. Both open the page over file:// , because that is the constraint the tools are built to: a check that passed on a local server and failed off disk would be worse than useless. With no Chrome on the machine they skip rather than fail — these are checks you run, not gates anything depends on. The best case for one of these is a control with nothing to look at check-glow-control.mjs exists because a layer's glow is the one thing in the format the creator cannot show you : its preview is a flat sheet with no lighting to be brighter than, so a glow written wrongly looks exactly like a glow written correctly. That is how the glow came to be dropped from the creator's export entirely — loading a glowing gene and exporting it again silently put the light out, and no amount of staring at the tool would have said so. Where a control has no picture, the check is the feedback. The other best case is a control that looks right and is not check-colour-control.mjs is the opposite failure to the glow, and the harder one to catch by eye. A colour op’s fork is exclusive : SpecPainter.solidColour paints color only while hue is below zero, and the hue/saturation/lightness triple the moment it is not. The creator used to show a live, editable colour well beside three parameters that silently overruled it — so you could set a colour, watch the preview change (because the hue was doing the painting), and export a gene whose color was never read. Every frame of that looks correct. So the checks read back the spec after each gesture, never the canvas: that the sentinel is restored when you go back to a fixed colour, that “Random” writes a named knob rather than an inline range the preview cannot resolve, and that a ramp switched to a swept hue empties its stop list — which is how the engine reads “sweep” — and gets a usable pair back when you switch away, rather than the empty list the loader refuses. Assert on the model, not on the picture check-path-canvas.mjs found a bug on its first run, and the bug was not in the canvas: every mask parameter is wrapped in a <label> , which forwards a click anywhere inside it to the first control it contains — so each click on the horse was also pressing the canvas's own Reverse button, and the drawing came out backwards one point at a time. It was obvious from a click sequence that printed the points array after every gesture, and would have been baffling to hit by hand. So the checks read that array after each click, drag and delete; the screenshot is a convenience ( --shot out.png ), never the assertion. A guard that throws tells you nothing — make it report Verified 2026-09-18: check-path-canvas.mjs passes, 41 checks, and the two things that were wrong with it are worth keeping apart. The canvas was never broken. The creator boots into the step-by-step view, which sets hidden on section.column.right — where the mask editor lives — so .path-canvas was present with a 320×267 backing store and clientWidth/Height of 0 , and every coordinate the guard aimed was aimed at nothing. It ticks the #stepper “show everything” box first now, the same toggle check-creator-steps.mjs drives. Note that the standing guess — a starter gene whose first mask was no longer the one masks[0] assumes — was wrong, and walking the element’s ancestors for the first one with a zero clientWidth answered it in one run where reasoning about it had not. The reason it hid for a day is the second bug, and it is the general one. checks() buffers : nothing prints until report() . This guard threw mid-run, so report() never ran and the process died with one line of message — no summary, no count, and no list of what had passed. An exception reads as a broken script; a report saying “3 passed, the canvas has size {w:0,h:0} ” reads as a broken tool and names the cause. The throw is caught and folded into a failed check now, which does the same for any future throw — a selector that stops matching, a renamed global. If you write one of these, never let it throw past report() . check-designer-boots.mjs is the other half of gap 199 . That gap is that nothing builds :web ; this is the failure one step later, where the build is green and the artefact is broken. TeaVM compiles only the reachable graph , so a new call in common/ can pull in a JDK method it does not have, and the failure is at instantiation : the Gradle task goes green, the wasm is written, and the page comes up blank. Run it after :web:bakeDesignerAssets , which is to say after any change to common/ or web/ . One trap worth naming, since both checks hit it: “loaded” is not “ready”. The creator runs a parity self-check on boot and the designer paints a frame or two after it publishes itself, so a fixed sleep is flaky against both. Poll for the condition you actually mean — open() takes a readyWhen expression for exactly this. Working the build Two goldens, and only one of them is affordable They answer different questions and cost three orders of magnitude apart, so the choice between them is not a matter of thoroughness: coat-golden.txt composes a full 128×128 texture for a set of whole horses. It is the one that would catch a phase interacting wrongly with another phase, and regenerating it needs a full :common:test — nine or ten minutes ( gap 97 ). coat-bake-golden.txt hashes every registered gene, every variant allele, one at a time , composed through the real gradient. It runs in seconds , and it is the right instrument for “did this edit move any gene I did not mean to touch”. Read which rows moved, not just whether the file moved. The bake golden's value is that it names the gene, so an edit intended for one gene that silently moved four is visible immediately — but only if the diff is actually read. It also asserts it covers every registered gene, so a new gene cannot quietly fall outside it. Tests that are supposed to fail eventually A few tests assert a bound rather than a behaviour, and when one fires the correct response is usually to move the bound and understand why, not to treat it as a regression. EpigenomeSizeTest caps the serialised epigenome, and ShowcaseGenotypesTest asserts a band that moves upward with every magical coat gene added — by construction, since more magical loci means more of them expressed in the showcase. Both fired during 0.3.0 and both were correct to fire. Write down which direction a tripwire is expected to drift when you add one, or the next session cannot tell an expected firing from a real one. The two hard portability rules now enforce themselves CommonPortabilityTest scans the sources of common/ for Minecraft, NeoForge and Mojang imports (hard rule 1) and for the Java 9+ APIs that have already been removed once (hard rule 2). This matters because the compiler will not catch either : common/ builds against a full JDK and the NeoForge classpath is right there, so the day the backport starts is the day you would otherwise find out. Note that a non-empty Map.of(k, v) is deliberately allowed — the ban is on the zero-argument and copyOf forms outside CommonMaps . TeaVM has a related trap that no scan can catch: it compiles only the reachable graph , so adding an @JSExport can surface a missing JDK method that has been sitting there all along. Build :web after adding one. Shell heredocs lie to you in two different ways Both cost real time, and neither produces an error that points anywhere near the cause. Anything substantial should be written to a file directly, or put in a patch script in the scratchpad and run by absolute path. A heredoc past roughly a hundred lines is silently truncated. The error is unexpected EOF while looking for matching quote , which reads as a quoting mistake and sends you hunting through your own string literals. A quoted delimiter does not protect backslashes. <<'PY' is supposed to pass the body through untouched, and does not: a Python 'a\\nb' arrives as a , newline, b — the escape has already been collapsed before Python sees it. The failure mode is the dangerous part : a patch script matching on a string that contains \\n (which is every patch that touches a Java or JavaScript string literal) simply fails to match, and if the script does not assert on its match count it reports success having changed nothing. Always assert the count. Every patch script in this project opens with assert s.count(old) == 1 for that reason, and that assertion is what caught this. Check that a regeneration actually regenerated Derived files in this project are checked in and fail silently when stale, so the regeneration step is load-bearing — and a regeneration that quietly does nothing looks exactly like one that worked. Two real instances, a session apart: A golden test that only wrote its output when the golden was missing. The documented recipe was “run the test, copy the file it writes”, but a mismatch wrote nothing, so the file sitting there was from some earlier run. Copying it back reinstated a stale golden and the test went green having compared nothing ( gap 128 ). The tell was a file that “moved by zero lines” while the test was still red — two facts that cannot both be true, which is the kind of contradiction worth stopping on. Gradle reporting processTestResources UP-TO-DATE after the source resource changed, so the test ran against the previously staged copy. If a resource edit does not change a test's result, check the staged file's timestamp before concluding anything about the code. The general form: after regenerating, confirm the artefact changed in the way you expected, and confirm the set of things that changed is the set you predicted. When SeededRng gained a seed scramble, 218 of 623 bake-golden lines moved — and the check that mattered was not the count but that the moved genes were exactly the ones that store epigenetics, with acan and b4galt7 correctly untouched. A post-bake git status is not evidence of staleness The inverse of the section above , and the more expensive mistake of the two. git status on this repo flags a rewritten file on mtime alone , without comparing its content. Every bake rewrites all of its outputs whether or not they changed, so a bake that changed one file reports dozens. git diff does the comparison; git status does not. Measured on 2026-09-15, after a bakeBreedFiles that genuinely changed one breed: Asked Answer git status --porcelain | wc -l 60 git diff --name-only 5 — the truth git diff-files on one of the 55 worktree SHA printed as all zeros — the “stat-dirty, not re-hashed” marker worktree / worktree-filtered / index / HEAD SHAs all four identical git show HEAD:path | cmp - path identical, zero CR on either side Neither git update-index --refresh nor --really-refresh cleared it; the latter prints needs update for files it has just been shown are identical. Do not chase it, and above all do not re-commit the files to “fix” it. The authoritative sweep over a folder, which is cheap and answers the only question that matters: for f in *.json; do [ "$(git hash-object "$f")" = "$(git rev-parse HEAD:"$f")" ] || echo "$f" done That found 1 of 61 breed files genuinely changed. git diff --ignore-cr-at-eol --numstat emitting no line for a path is the other quick tell. Renormalise to the glob, never to . The other half of this noise was real: core.autocrlf=true wanted CRLF in the worktree while the bake tools write LF. That is now settled by a .gitattributes pinning *.json text eol=lf (and *.wasm binary ). The index already stored LF, so adding it changed no committed byte. But git add --renormalize . — the documented follow-up to changing .gitattributes — is repo-wide . Run as written it staged 51 intake/*.md files , rewriting every line of each to strip CR from blobs that genuinely hold CRLF. intake/ is the owner's queue and is never ours to rewrite, so that was backed out with git restore --staged intake/ . Scope it: git add --renormalize -- '*.json' . A ClassNotFoundException for our own class is almost never real A Gradle build replaces common/build/libs/common.jar in place , and a running runClient holds that jar on its classpath. The JVM keeps every class it has already loaded, so the game carries on quite happily — until it needs one it has not loaded yet, and then throws ClassNotFoundException for a class that is sitting right there in the source tree and in the jar. It happened on 2026-09-09: jar rewritten at 18:40:13, crash at 18:40:43, ClassNotFoundException: com.example.horsegenetics.common.trait.Viability in a horse tick. That class had not been edited in weeks and was present in both the common jar and the built mod jar. Nothing was wrong. Check the timestamps before hunting The failure looks exactly like a packaging bug, and the obvious next move is to go looking for one that does not exist. Compare the jar's mtime against the crash time first. If the jar is newer, that is the whole answer. The other half is not to cause it: building while somebody is mid-play will do this to them. It is the same family as runServer refusing to start while their client holds the world's DirectoryLock — their game and this build share files. The log should be able to hear the player Three reports in one play session - "F8 only turns on", "Make egg does nothing", "the game just crashed" - and two of them left nothing in the log at all , because the code that logs was never reached. Diagnosing those took static reading and a stack trace that arrived four minutes late. So ActionTrace (and its client half) writes one [trace] line per discrete thing a person does: a horse joining a level with its whole genome, a right-click on an animal, a mod item or block used, a mount or dismount, a taming, a foal, a death, a dimension change, every mod keybind, every mod screen opening and every button pressed inside one. One grep gives the session in order. The button lines are called from inside the handlers on purpose. A hook that reported presses the screen never received would report the one broken press as if it had worked - and a covered button producing silence where every other button produces a line is exactly the reading that was missing. The rule this encodes: instrument the thing that runs, not the thing that was aimed at . A debug overlay took the world down, and hid its own bug for four minutes first F8's horse highlight put herd leads on a scoreboard team and took every nearby horse off it again when the toggle went off. Only leads were ever added, and Scoreboard.removePlayerFromTeam(name, team) throws for an entry that is not on the team - so it threw on the first ordinary horse it reached. What it looked like from the chair was two unrelated bugs. The throw escaped the packet handler on the OFF press, after the player had already been removed from the on-set and before the "OFF" message, so the owner reported “F8 isn't toggling off, only turning on”. Four minutes later the auto-off ran the same line from ServerTickEvent.Post , where nothing catches it, and the server died with Exception in server tick loop . One cause, two reports, and the crash arrived long enough after the last keypress to look unrelated to it. Two fixes, and the second is the general one: ask the scoreboard before removing, and wrap anything a debug overlay does in a guard that switches the overlay off rather than ending the tick loop . This one ships in real builds - it was registered outside the production gate on purpose, because testers asked for it - so "it is only a dev tool" was never true of it. And two Gradle builds in the same module at once corrupt its class files The same family, one step worse. A seed hunt that boots runServer in a loop is a build - each round compiles the mod before it launches - so running compileJava beside it puts two Gradle invocations in neoforge-26.1.2/build/classes/ at once. What comes back is not a lock error, it is bad class file: …/DebugTestWorldCleanup.class against a class nobody touched, which reads exactly like the ClassNotFoundException above and is a half-written file rather than a missing one. The fix is the obvious one - wait, then rebuild - and the reason it is worth a note is that the diagnosis is not obvious: the error names your source, not your concurrency. If a background task of yours runs Gradle, treat the whole module's build directory as held until it exits. A field used by a static block must be declared above it Three things in this mod register themselves from a static { } block — block/DoubleGates , compat/ModdedArmour and the cart items — and all three build their ids partly out of other mods' jars. That is a good pattern here and it has one sharp edge: static initialisers run in source order , so a field declared below the block is still null while the block runs. This is ordinary Java and it is on this page anyway, because of where it lands. A throw from a static initialiser reached by the mod constructor is an ExceptionInInitializerError during mod loading: not a broken feature but a mod that does not load at all, and on a server, a server that does not start. It cost a boot during the v0.5.013 fix — a duplicate-id guard whose Set was declared after the loop it guarded, so the code added to prevent a crash-at-load caused one . It is also invisible to the compiler and to every unit test, because nothing but a real mod load runs those blocks in anger. What actually catches it ./gradlew :neoforge-26.1.2:runServer , which is the session routine's build check before any release for exactly this reason. A green build proves nothing about it: :test does not construct the mod, and the compiler is happy to read a final field before it is assigned when it happens through a method call. Grep for static { in the NeoForge module before trusting a change near one. Writing a gene’s science tab The pass that wrote twenty-five of them established a shape, and it is worth following rather than re-deriving. A tab carries: the locus and the variant with coordinates, the mechanism, the real inheritance table, breed-by-breed frequency where anyone has measured it, an established / inferred / unsupported split, and — last, and the reason the pass was worth doing — an explicit statement of where the mod departs from the literature . A rewrite that omits that last section has missed the point; three of those disagreements turned out to be substantive enough to become gap 134 . Never write one from memory The twenty-five came from owner-supplied source files , and that is the only reason they can state coordinates and frequencies. A veterinary claim invented to fill a section is worse than the stub it replaced, and worse than the honest absence the stub replaced before that. If there is no source to hand, leave the stub and say so. The shape to copy is any of the twenty-five — mushroom is the cleanest short one and dun the fullest. A tab that is short because it is a complete argument rather than a survey is finished; do not pad it to match a word count. When one is written, re-run node wiki/tools/sync-page-views.mjs , node wiki/tools/build-search-index.mjs and node wiki/tools/check-links.mjs . Which tabs are still thin is on the roadmap tab . Verified A per-gene coat regression test exists (2026-09-08). A change to mask parts moved what twelve genes paint and coat-golden.txt stayed byte-identical, because it exercised 39 registry genes and 3 data-driven ones. CoatBakeGoldenTest walks Genes.codeOrder() , so it has no list to fall behind, and runs in seconds. It hashes rather than looks: a diff is a prompt to go and look at icons, and its failure message says so. Regenerate the pipeline golden when cutting a release (2026-09-08). It had been stale across two sessions and forty-six genes, so a real regression was indistinguishable from expected churn. It was regenerated while cutting 0.3.0, when the full suite runs anyway (681 tests, 5m33s). A red golden writes its actual (2026-09-09). CoatPipelineGoldenTest used to write common/build/coat-golden.txt only when the golden was missing, so copying it back after a mismatch reinstated a stale file and the test went green having compared nothing new. It happened once, caught because the file moved by zero lines. It now writes the actual on a mismatch, as CoatBakeGoldenTest did. The portability rules are a test (2026-09-08). CommonPortabilityTest scans common/ sources for a Minecraft / NeoForge / Mojang import (hard rule 1), for Map.of() or Map.copyOf( outside CommonMaps (the TeaVM empty-map trap), and for the two removed Java 9+ calls. It is a source scan, blind to reflection, and it allows a non-empty Map.of(k, v, …) , which light ships and the browser exercises on every preview. The creator checks parity on boot (2026-09-06). js/parity.js is the one implementation; check-parity.mjs and the page both run it, and SpecFixtureTool emits fixtures/expected.js because a file:// page cannot fetch a sibling. Building it found the terminal check green against a stale fixture while the JS was a day behind on the top/bottom UV swap: re-bake the snapshot before trusting the check. The composer's arithmetic is inside the parity gate (2026-09-09). The creator's mirror in js/fields.js kept the old rgb === 0 ? PURE_BLACK_ALPHA : 0xFF rule; black bakes to about #161515 , so the branch never fired and every dark preview was drawn opaque. Nothing caught it because parity ran restrict() and tint() and never compose() . The fixture now carries answer tables for nearBlackAlpha and the shadow lift; restoring the old equality fails three checks. check-links.mjs fails on a repeated HTML id (2026-09-09). An anchor resolves to the first element with its id, so the second section cannot be linked and every link to it still looks right. Eleven were found (eight on the session log, two on the checklist, one on spawn eggs) and later occurrences took a -2 suffix; the check also found two gaps sharing number 46, which is why the zebra-map entry is gap 127 . Every natural gene page carries a science tab (2026-09-09). 157 of 203 gene pages had none, but 131 were magical genes, where none is correct; 25 natural pages were missing one, and all 25 were written from owner-supplied sources rather than stubbed. check-gene-tabs.mjs now holds an empty allowlist, so a new natural page without one fails. The contradictions those tabs found are gap 134 ; the older stub tabs are on the roadmap tab . A gene page must be named after its gene key (2026-09-10). GeneWikiTool derives the filename from the key, so four pages written under readable names were missing from the sidebar and landing page with the build green; the bake only printed no page of their own, so not listed , and check-links --orphans missed them because the roadmap linked them. The four were renamed. A comment saying something is cheap is not evidence (2026-09-10). World-reading condition flags were sampled all four together, so a caveborn horse needing one block-light read paid for a jukebox search and an entity scan every twenty ticks; and guardian 's handler scanned a sixteen-block box on every hit any player took before checking ownership, while its javadoc said it checked ownership first. Flags are computed individually and the horse tick keeps an owner index. Both hazards had been written down in advance on the gene's own page; only reading the finished code against them found the bugs.
