Compatibility
(Project / living alongside other mods)
This mod does not add a horse. It takes the vanilla minecraft:horse and hangs everything — the genome, the coat, the body stats, the herd — off it as data attachments and a render override. That one decision is the single biggest thing determining how it gets along with other mods, and this page is about what it buys and what it costs.

Project / living alongside other mods Compatibility This mod does not add a horse. It takes the vanilla minecraft:horse and hangs everything — the genome, the coat, the body stats, the herd — off it as data attachments and a render override. That one decision is the single biggest thing determining how it gets along with other mods, and this page is about what it buys and what it costs. Most of the page is about accidents — what happens when this mod and another are installed together and neither knows the other exists. One section is the opposite, and it is the newest thing here: this mod now reads the other mods in your pack on purpose and generates content for the woods and metals they brought. The decision: attachments, not a custom entity The source design documents this mod grew out of assumed an EntityCustomHorse extends HorseEntity , with vanilla horse spawns zeroed out by biome modifiers and replaced with the mod's own. That approach is dead and is not coming back. The codebase has never worked that way and now deliberately never will: the record, the attachments, both sync payloads, the trait resolution and the coat all attach to the vanilla Horse , and the visual override the documents cited as the reason for a subclass already works without one. What the attachment approach buys, and why the call went this way: Horses in existing worlds just work. A subclass can only apply to horses spawned after it exists; every horse in every world already saved stays a vanilla horse forever, or needs a conversion pass that is its own source of bugs. With attachments a horse acquires a genome the first time it is ticked, whenever that is. The 1.12.2 backport stays cheap. Registering an entity type, replacing spawns and porting a renderer is version-specific work three times over; an attachment is a capability there and a data attachment here. Spawn replacement is the fragile part, and we skip it. Zeroing vanilla horse spawns and adding your own is exactly the mechanism that breaks when another mod does the same thing, changes biome spawn lists, or adds horses of its own. Nothing needs it. Nothing in the gameplay layer — stalls, carrots, whistles, the browser, the dimension — requires a new entity type. The cost is real and worth stating: a mod that replaces the horse renderer, or that spawns horses with its own baked variant, will collide (see below). We take that trade because the alternative collides with a much larger set of things and breaks every existing save as well. What this mod actually touches The honest compatibility surface, so a conflict can be reasoned about rather than guessed at. Area What we do Conflict risk Entity registry Nothing. No new entity type, no spawn-egg-driven entity, no replacement of minecraft:horse . None Entity renderer Replace the renderer for EntityType.HORSE with GeneticHorseRenderer , using our own 128px models ( HdHorseModel / HdBabyHorseModel ) and a generated texture per genome. High — only one mod can own a renderer Data attachments Four on a horse: the record (genome + pedigree + breed), horse care (bond / herd), cooldowns, and the live breeding-carrot window. None — namespaced, additive Attributes Write the base values of MOVEMENT_SPEED , MAX_HEALTH , JUMP_STRENGTH and SCALE from the genotype, on every horse join. Medium — we overwrite, see below AI goals Add three goals to every horse: bond-follow, wild-herd, and a melee attack (plus a target goal). Vanilla goals are left alone. Medium — goal priority collisions Spawning Two biome modifiers that add horse spawns (herds and loners). We remove nothing. Medium — additive, so densities stack Interactions Cancel EntityInteract for: name tags, shears, buckets on a milk-gene horse, breeding carrots, seed jars, stall signs, and the dev stick / clock. Medium — first handler wins Recipes / items / blocks All namespaced under horsegenetics . One block ( hay_portal ), one menu, one dimension. None Loot tables A global loot modifier injecting research papers into ~8 vanilla chest tables. None — GLMs compose Other mods’ jar files We read them. In the mod constructor, compat/ModdedMaterials walks every loaded mod’s JarContents looking for fence-gate blockstates, the c:ingots/* / c:gems/* / c:dyes* tag files and the item textures those name. Read-only, and nothing is written back. See below . None — a read, not a hook A generated pack Writes .minecraft/phc/generated/ and offers it to both pack repositories through AddPackFindersEvent . Everything in it is in our own namespace, except two vanilla block tags it adds to. Low — it is a pack at Position.TOP , so it wins a same-path fight The renderer is the real conflict Only one mod can own the renderer for EntityType.HORSE . Whichever registers last wins, and if it is not us, every horse renders as a plain white horse — the genome is still there, still inherited, still correct, and completely invisible. If it is us, the other mod's textures are ignored. Concretely, that means we are incompatible with: Horse texture packs implemented as mods that swap the horse renderer or model rather than shipping resources. Other horse-genetics mods (Realistic Horse Genetics, SWEM 's coat system, and their kin). Two mods both generating a coat from their own genome is not a conflict that can be reconciled — they are two answers to the same question. A deliberate patch is a different matter and can be very clean: see supporting another mod . Model-replacement mods that give the horse a new mesh. Our coat generator projects into our UV layout ( HorseSkinGeometry ); a different mesh means every pattern lands in the wrong place. A resource pack that retextures horses is a different matter and is simply ignored: we never sample the vanilla horse textures. Our template is horse_white.png in this mod's own namespace. That is the intended behaviour today and the intended behaviour is meant to change — the plan is to read the pack's own white horse and paint on it, at the pack's own resolution ( texture resolution , and below ). Attributes: we overwrite, and that is deliberate A horse's speed, health, jump and scale are resolved from its genotype and written as attribute base values every time it joins the world — not only at birth. That is on purpose: it is what lets a re-tuned gene, or a change to the health config, reach horses that already exist, and it is what stops vanilla's own randomisation from surviving. The consequence for other mods is narrow but sharp. Anything that sets a horse's base speed or health will be overwritten on the next join. Anything that applies an AttributeModifier — which is how well-behaved mods, potions, and equipment do it — composes correctly on top of ours and is unaffected. If a mod's horse buff stops working, that is the distinction to check first. AI goals and interactions We add goals at priorities 3 (melee), 4 (bond follow) and 6 (wild herd), and give EntityType.HORSE an ATTACK_DAMAGE attribute it does not normally have. A mod adding its own horse goals at those priorities will interleave unpredictably rather than crash; a mod that clears the goal selector will silently disable herding and bond-following. Interaction handlers are first-come. We cancel the event on both sides for the items we claim, so a mod that also wants to do something with shears or a bucket on a horse will find that only one of us runs. There is no priority negotiation here and adding one is not planned. Spawning stacks Our biome modifiers are purely additive — we add herd spawns to 37 biomes and loner spawns across the overworld, and we remove nothing. So installing this alongside another mod that also adds horse spawns gives you the sum of both, which is usually more horses than either author intended. If a world feels overrun, that is the first thing to check, and the fix is a datapack overriding add_horse_herds / add_horse_loners . Third-party genes are supported, and are the right seam The intended way for another mod (or a pack author) to extend this one is not to touch our classes. It is to add a gene: a gene file dropped in .minecraft/phc/genes/ , or shipped on the classpath in a mod's own horsegenetics/genes/index.json — no Java, no rebuild; or, for something the file format cannot express, a Java Gene registered from a mod constructor. Both interleave into the registry by priority , so a third-party natural gene lands in the right place in the paint order without anyone editing a list. Register from the mod constructor : every registration lengthens the genotype code by a segment, so a gene registered after something has parsed a code invalidates it. A gene added or removed changes the code string, and this mod keeps no back-compatibility for that — adding or removing a gene means existing horses regenerate their coats, and a saved code with a different segment count will not parse. Adding a gene mod mid-world is therefore a fresh-world operation for now. The other direction: we read your other mods and build for them Everything above this line is about tolerating other mods. This section is the reverse, and it is the one place the mod goes looking. Install a mod that adds a wood and you get a double gate in it. Install a mod that adds a metal and you get a horse armour made of it, and a bench fitting in its colour. You do not install anything else, run anything, or switch anything on. Before this, the twelve double gates came off a hardcoded table of vanilla’s woods, and a modded ingot was not a fitting and had no armour. Now both lists are read off the other mods themselves. The whole of it lives in neoforge-26.1.2/.../neoforge/compat/ , and the class headers there are the long form of what follows. The seam is files , not registries — and it has to be The natural way to ask “what ingots exist” is to read the item registry, or the c:ingots tag. Neither is available at the moment the question has to be answered. Everything here must be known in the mod constructor , because that is the last moment a DeferredRegister can still be handed an entry — and at that moment: no registry is populated. Every mod’s RegisterEvent is still to come, and which mod’s runs first is not ours to decide; no tag exists at all. Tags are datapack content and are not loaded until a world is. What is available is every mod’s jar, through ModList . So compat/ModdedMaterials reads the files a mod ships rather than the objects it will later register — and that turns out to be the better source anyway, because a file is something the mod author wrote down on purpose rather than a heuristic over a registry. The API for it is on the 26.1.2 notes . What we look for What counts Why that and not something else A wood A mod shipping assets/<ns>/blockstates/<name>_fence_gate.json . The narrowest declaration that means what we need: something the player can already place a gate of, which is exactly what the recipe takes two of. Vanilla’s own namespace and ours are both skipped — the twelve are hand-listed and ours are where the generated ones land, so taking either would make a double gate of a double gate. A metal or crystal An item named in a data/c/tags/item/ingots/*.json or .../gems/*.json file. The NeoForge common tags are where a mod says “this is an ingot” in the one place every other mod reads. Only the per-material child tags are read, never the c:ingots parent — the parent is a list of tag references , so reading it finds names rather than items and reading both finds everything twice. A dye An item in the c:dyes tag files that carries no vanilla minecraft:dye component. Most modded dyes are one of vanilla’s sixteen, carry the component, and have always worked at the bench. This is only the ones whose colour vanilla has no name for. An ingot’s colour is the average of its own picture There is no other source for it. Nothing in a mod’s files states that tin is silver-grey; the only place that fact exists anywhere is the art somebody drew. So the fitting colour and the armour tint are both the mean of the opaque texels of that item’s own texture — which is the same thing a player’s eye does when it decides two ingots look different. Averaged in linear light , not in sRGB: averaging gamma-encoded bytes darkens and desaturates, and an ingot is mostly highlight and shadow of one hue, which is the case that gets most wrong. Half-transparent texels are skipped as edge antialiasing rather than material. A metal whose art cannot be found or decoded falls back to a mid grey rather than being dropped, so it stays usable. This works on a dedicated server, and that is not an accident Mod jars are universal — they carry their assets/ whether or not the process will ever draw anything — so the PNG a colour is averaged from is readable on a server with no resource manager and no client at all. It is also why the generated armour is one shipped greyscale plate tinted per material rather than a recoloured PNG per metal: there is no image code at runtime at all, so there is nothing for a server to behave differently about. Load order can never matter Philosophy §7 is explicit that nothing may depend on which mod loaded first, and a scan over the list FML hands us in its own order would break that quietly: two players with the same mods would get the same content in a different order, and anything derived from the order would disagree. Every result therefore leaves ModdedMaterials sorted by id , and the fingerprint below is taken over the sorted form. Six mods, one steel A generated armour is named after the material and not after the mod that brought it: steel_horse_armor , because “Steel Horse Armor” is what a player is looking for and “Alltheores Steel Horse Armor” is not. That was written when a material meant an item, and it does not . On a 319-jar pack, six mods each filed a steel ingot under c:ingots/steel ; nineteen material names had more than one claimant. One armour per metal meant six items wanting one registry id, and the second of them threw Duplicate registration out of a static initialiser reached from the mod constructor — so the mod did not load at all , and took the server with it. That shipped as v0.5.012. So the ids collapse by material name , in ModdedMaterials.armourMetals() . Six steels give one Steel Horse Armor. The winner is the lowest item id, so it does not depend on which mod loaded first ( above ), and the losers are dropped from that list only — metals() keeps all of them, because the bench colours a fitting from whichever ingot the player actually put in it and has to know every one. Collapsing is the honest answer, not only the safe one Those six steels already share a c:ingots/steel repair tag, which is what the armour is repaired with — so six separately-registered armours would have been six identical items , differing only in which mod's ingot art their tint was averaged from. The obvious alternative, putting the namespace in the id, is worse on both counts: it gives the player six near-identical entries in the recipe book, and it would not have fixed the crash , because ExtendedAE ships an entro_crystal and an entro_ingot that collide inside a single jar. Every one of the six ingots still forges the armour. The recipes are written per ingot rather than per armour — several recipes to one output is ordinary, and vanilla does it for planks — because the alternative is a dead end the player cannot see: they hold a steel ingot, the recipe book shows a steel armour, and the grid refuses. The same pack turned up bloodmagic:ingot_hellforged , with the affix on the front. Only a suffix was stripped, so it would have been sold as “Ingot Hellforged Horse Armor”; Metal.material() now takes ingot , gem , crystal and shard off either end, and refuses to strip one that would leave nothing behind. What gets generated Per modded wood Per modded ingot or gem Registered A DoubleFenceGateBlock and its item, beside vanilla’s twelve in block/DoubleGates . One Item with Properties.horseArmor(...) , in compat/ModdedArmour . Written into the pack Eight re-parented models, a 32-variant blockstate, an item definition, a block loot table, a shapeless recipe, two vanilla tag entries and a language key. An equipment asset, an item model, an item definition carrying our tint source, a shapeless recipe, a language key and a metalsmith trade. Textures None at all. A double gate has never had art of its own — the eight shapes are shipped template models and a wood’s models are each a parent plus a texture id — so a modded wood needs a pointer at that mod’s plank texture and nothing else. None at all. One shipped greyscale plate, tinted per material through the equipment asset’s dyeable.color_when_undyed . The recipe Two of that mod’s own fence gates plus our nothing else — the one recipe in the mod with no modded ingredient ( why ). Six of that ingot plus one of our horse hair for the padding. Both recipes keep the house rule : every recipe carries at least one modded ingredient and every output is a modded item in our namespace, so none of them can collide with a vanilla or third-party recipe — BHAR included. It also means the gate recipe is unreachable until the player actually has the wood, without anything having to check that they do. The two block tags are additive, and that is a property of tags rather than a choice. Datapack tag files merge across packs unless one sets replace , so the generated mineable/axe and fence_gates files contribute the modded gates beside the shipped twelve. The generated file therefore lists only the modded ones: copying the shipped file and adding to it would work today and would start asserting things about woods that are no longer installed the moment it went stale. Where it lands: a pack on disk, served to both repositories compat/GeneratedPack writes .minecraft/phc/generated/ — beside the breeds, the genes and the config files — and offers it back to the game through AddPackFindersEvent as both a resource pack and a datapack . It is alwaysActive , because the player never chose to install it and must not have to go and switch it on, and hidden, because it is machinery rather than a pack anybody picked. Three reasons it is a folder on disk rather than resources held in memory: Silent failure is the enemy. A generated model that does not draw is a purple-and-black cube with no error anywhere . With the pack on disk the file that failed can be opened and read, which is the difference between a five-minute fix and an afternoon. It has to be a datapack too. Recipes, loot tables and villager trades are server data; a client-side-only answer would have given the gates no recipe and the armour no trade. It is the owner’s own suggestion, made honest. The fallback offered was a one-time tool you run in the Minecraft directory that builds patches. This is that, minus the running it — same folder, same inspectable files, generated by the mod at the moment it knows what to generate. The folder carries a fingerprint of exactly what it was built from: the woods, the metals, each metal’s colour — so a mod that only repaints its ingot still gets a redrawn armour — and a rules version , bumped whenever the code that turns that list into files changes. Without that last part the fingerprint answers “same mods?” when the question is “same output?”, and a player who upgrades this mod without touching their mod list keeps a folder built by the old rules. That is exactly the silent staleness the folder exists to avoid, and the v0.5.013 rename is the first change that would have hit it. On every launch the fingerprint is recomputed from the mods actually present. Same answer, nothing is written. Different answer, the folder is wiped and rebuilt from scratch — not written over, because a stale file for a mod that is gone is precisely the thing that then loads and fails for a reason nobody can find. No modded materials at all, which is the overwhelmingly common case, and no folder is left behind either. A README.txt in it says all of that to whoever opens it. It is built at pack-finder time, not in the constructor The scan happens in the mod constructor because it must. The writing happens later, when the pack repository is assembled, and the difference is load-bearing: by then every mod’s items exist, which is what lets a recipe check that the item it names is actually registered. Existing is not the same as being readable , and the difference is a crash. See below . How strong a generated armour is A gem sits where diamond sits and an ingot sits where iron does, and that is the whole of it. ModdedArmour.protectionFor is a pure function of the metal. Stated plainly rather than dressed up: where an ore generates is not readable from a jar — there is no depth to measure and no declaration to read — so this is a guess about balance from the one signal there is, and it will sometimes be wrong. Every vanilla rung is read out of ArmorMaterials at runtime rather than written down, so a vanilla rebalance carries rather than silently diverging. The metalsmith’s tier is the same ladder — a stronger armour is a later trade — so a player who levels him up for the good stuff finds that the good stuff is good. Why it is not cleverer than that — and cannot be It used to be. Through 0.5.013 , protectionFor asked their own chestplate what it was worth first and gave this armour the horse-body value of whichever vanilla material came closest; the ladder was only the fallback, nudged a rung by the ingot’s Rarity . It was a better answer and it does not work , for a reason worth writing down because it will come up again for anything that wants to read another mod’s item. An item’s armour value, its rarity and everything else about it is a data component, and default components are bound exactly once — during the first datapack load, long after every moment at which this mod can still say what its own items are worth. Item.components() delegates to Holder.Reference.components() , which until then throws NullPointerException: Components not bound yet . ModifyDefaultComponentsEvent is not an exception. It is the mechanism by which components are built, so nothing is bound while it is being dispatched — which is where 0.5.013 died on a 319-jar pack. Nor is deferring the read into the Initializer lambda it hands out. DataComponentInitializers.build runs every initializer into builders and only then binds them all, so during that pass no item is bound either. Nor is pack-finder time, which is earlier still — the second place the old version would have crashed, had the first not got there first. So the ladder is the only thing askable at a moment we can still answer, and it is now asked directly, at registration. The same constraint is why the metalsmith’s tier and the armour’s value cannot disagree: they are one pure function, called from three places with three different amounts of game in existence. The metalsmith’s trades are rewritten, not appended to Datapack tags merge; datapack registries do not. minecraft:trade_set is a registry, so two packs declaring the same tier do not combine — the higher pack wins outright, and the generated pack sits at Position.TOP . The generated tier file therefore has to carry the shipped trades as well as the new ones, and it gets them by reading the shipped file off our own classpath rather than keeping a second copy of the list. Edit the metalsmith’s tiers and the generated file follows; it cannot go stale. A tag entry is a declaration, not a promise A mod can ship a tag naming an item it only registers behind a config flag, or name another mod’s item in a common tag whether or not that mod is installed. Both are legitimate and both leave us holding an id nothing answers to. It cost three walls of red text to find that out, from a generated recipe whose ingredient did not exist: the recipe simply fails to parse, loudly, and the player is shown a page of somebody else’s mod id. So anything naming a third-party item in a way the game will later resolve — which is recipes, and only recipes — asks ModdedMaterials.itemExists first, and logs which mod and which id when the answer is no. The gate or armour still exists and still draws; it just cannot be crafted from something that is not there. …and neither is a fence gate The same rule, learned a second time in 2026-09-19 from a real 332-jar pack, one rung earlier: the file that makes us adopt a wood is itself only a declaration. MaterialScan.collectWoods takes a <name>_fence_gate blockstate as its definition of a wood, and that is exactly right for the thing it was written for — our double gate spends two of that gate , so the ingredient is guaranteed by the very file we keyed on. It says nothing whatever about <name>_planks , which the carts go on to spend. Every Slab makes the gap enormous, because it generates a fence and a gate for every block in the game . The pack adopted 287 woods, of which 247 were pseudo-woods — andesite , black_wool , coal_ore , budding_amethyst — and registered 1,488 cart items that could never be crafted , warning once apiece into a boot log nobody reads twice. The double gates, notably, were fine : all 468 candidates ship their own gate item, so every one of them crafted. Only the carts reached for an item nothing had promised. So confirmWoods now drops any candidate no jar ships a <name>_planks item for. It must be a file and not itemExists : this runs in the mod constructor where the registries are empty, so the registry answer would be “no” for every mod on earth ( the seam is files ). It runs as a second pass over every jar, for the same reason colourOf does — a gate declared in one jar may have its planks in another. Across that pack it rejects 266 of 468 candidates, and every non-EverySlab rejection is also genuinely not a wood: mcwfences ’ metal fences, refurbished_furniture ’s lattices, framedblocks:framed , enderio:painted . 287 woods become 39. The recipe-time itemExists check above stays exactly where it is. It is the backstop, and it is still the only thing that can catch an item registered behind a config flag. What changed is that it is no longer asked to disown 1,488 items we should never have registered. The wagon has its own version of this. Only that one cart spends stripped_<name>_log , and nine real modded woods ship no such item — evilcraft:undead , forbidden_arcanus:edelwood and fungyss , integrateddynamics:menril , four regions_unexplored bioshrooms, undergarden:ancient_root . Those are woods and keep their other five carts; CartWood.has simply gives them no wagon, rather than a wagon that cannot be built. And the bench takes the new materials The fittings row is no longer a closed list: modded ingots and gems join the hand-picked fifteen, coloured from their own art. The fifteen win on a clash , so a mod adding a second copper does not quietly redefine copper. The dye rows gained the narrower case — a modded dye whose colour vanilla has no name for. A dye carrying vanilla’s own component always worked and is untouched. Supporting another mod deliberately Most of this page is about accidents — what happens when this mod and another are installed together and neither knows about the other. This section is the other question: what would it take to make a specific mod work with this one on purpose? The answer is different for each, but it decomposes the same way every time, into four seams. Seam What we own What a patch would have to supply 1. Entity identity Attachments on minecraft:horse , applied on first tick. If the other mod uses its own entity class, the attachment hooks, the sync payloads and the spawn-time genome roll all have to be re-pointed at its type. Mechanical but pervasive — and impossible if that type does not extend AbstractHorse . 2. The mesh, and its UVs HorseSkinGeometry : a table of axis-aligned boxes and their UV rectangles, from which every texel’s body-space point is derived. The same table for the other mod’s mesh. This is the seam that matters most and the one that is closest to already being data — see below . 3. The renderer One renderer for EntityType.HORSE , drawing a generated texture. Whoever loses this loses everything. A real patch does not fight for it — it either hands our texture to their renderer, or hands their model to ours. 4. Gameplay overlap Stats from the genotype, bond, herds, breeding, recall. A decision per system about which mod is authoritative, and the code to make the loser defer. Usually easier than it sounds, because the two mods rarely both care about the same number. Seam 2 is the interesting one, because we already cover more than a patch author would expect . What this mod brings that almost no horse mod has is the part between a genome and a pixel: a Mendelian model over Genes.codeOrder() loci with inherited per-allele epigenetics, a three-phase paint pipeline , a body-space projection so every pattern is a function of anatomy rather than of texture coordinates, and a data-driven gene format that lets a pattern be written without Java. What it does not bring, and what most of the mods below have, is tack, carts, animation, riding feel, storage, and detailed models. Those are almost perfectly complementary. The conflicts are nearly all seam 3, and seam 3 is negotiable. User-written model remaps HorseSkinGeometry is a table: for each part, a pivot, a box, a rest-pose pitch, and a 64-space texOffs . From those it derives every part’s bounding box in body space and every face’s UV rectangle, and from those it answers the only question the paint engine ever asks — given texel (px, py), what point on the horse’s body does it shade? Nothing in that table is Minecraft-specific and nothing in it is hard-coded per gene. It is a Java constant today only because there has only ever been one mesh to describe. Lift it into a file and a pack author could describe someone else’s horse: { "id": "betterhorses:adult", "sheet": 128, "texels_per_unit": 2, "parts": { "body": { "pivot": [0, 11, 5], "box": [-5, -8, -17, 10, 10, 22], "tex": [0, 32] }, "left_front_leg": { "pivot": [4, 14, -10], "box": [-3, -1, -1.9, 4, 11, 4], "tex": [26, 16] } } } That is close to a transcription of what a model’s addBox / texOffs calls already say, which is the point: a remap is readable off the other mod’s model class, or off an OptiFine/EMF .jem file, by someone who cannot write Java. Given one, the entire existing paint engine works unchanged — every gene, every spec file, both editors — because no gene has ever known what mesh it was painting. What a remap format would have to settle, none of which is decided: Non-box geometry. The projection assumes axis-aligned boxes; rotated parts already use their rest-pose AABB as an approximation. A mesh with real curved geometry, or with parts that are not boxes at all, cannot be described this way without a genuine UV-unwrap importer — a much larger project. Part naming. HorseSkinGeometry.Part is a closed enum, and a good deal of gene code names members of it directly (mane, tail, the four legs, the two ears). A mesh that splits a leg into three segments needs those to map onto one logical LEFT_FRONT_LEG , which means the remap file needs a many-to-one grouping layer as well as a geometry table. Who resolves the conflict. A remap says how to paint another mod’s mesh; it does not say who gets to register the renderer. That is still seam 3 and still needs one side to yield. Validation. A wrong remap produces a horse with patterns in the wrong places and no error. The four-band colour probe is the existing tool for exactly this and would have to be exposed to pack authors. Gaits, for models with real legs A related and separable idea. Vanilla’s horse has four box legs and one animation; several mods below ship articulated legs and distinct gaits — SWEM has walk, trot, canter and gallop as separate animations. This mod currently has nothing to say about movement : it resolves speed, jump and health onto attributes and stops there. That is a gap worth filling on its own terms, and it is the one place where a mod with a better model would let this mod express something it genuinely cannot today. The genome already carries the inputs — MSTN , LCORL , HMGA2 , the body-size locus and the resolved speed stat all describe how a horse is built and how it moves — and gait is a real, heritable, breed-defining trait in horses that the mod currently throws away. A Standardbred that paces rather than trots is a genetic fact ( DMRT3 ), and it is exactly the kind of thing this project exists to model. Sketch, unbuilt and not on the roadmap yet: A GaitContribution interface alongside the existing coat and eye contributions, so a gene declares a gait rather than the renderer inferring one. Resolution in common/ to a plain named result — walk / trot / pace / canter / gallop plus a tempo scalar — with no animation concepts in it at all, so the backport and the browser tools keep working. A thin NeoForge translation that maps that result onto whatever the active model offers: vanilla’s single animation ignores it, an articulated model selects its matching clip. Which means the patch for a detailed-leg mod is small — a table from our gait names to their animation ids — and the gene work is shared across every such mod rather than written per-mod. SWEM and SWEM Lite The Star Worm Equestrian Mod is the largest equestrian mod there is, and it is the most interesting case on this page because the overlap is almost exactly one subsystem . SWEM adds its own horse entity with its own GeckoLib model, its own animations including separate gaits, and a large hand-drawn coat catalogue — well over a hundred coats, selected by tags. Its own documentation is candid that the breeding is not genetics: each coat carries one or more colour tags, a foal picks a tag from a parent, and the result can be biologically nonsense (their example: a white foal growing into a leopard appaloosa, because both carry the white tag). That was explicitly a placeholder until a real genetics system was possible. So the patch writes itself in principle: this mod supplies the genetics and the coat, SWEM keeps everything else. Their tack, stable blocks, tools, animations, jumps, horse care and the rest are untouched; we replace the tag-based coat selection with a genome and a generated texture. What that would actually require, in the order it bites: A geometry table for the SWEM mesh ( seam 2 ). Their model is not vanilla’s and is not box-only, so this is the hard part and may be the blocking one — a GeckoLib model with curved or non-axis-aligned geometry cannot be described by the current projection without a real unwrap importer. Attachments on their entity (seam 1). Viable if their horse extends AbstractHorse ; a full port of the attachment layer if not. Suppressing their coat selection — their texture resolution step has to be overridden to ask us instead. Whether that is possible without mixins depends on how their renderer is structured. Deciding the stat boundary (seam 4). SWEM has its own progression and its own per-horse stats; ours are resolved from the genotype. Two answers to one question again, and the honest resolution is that one of them wins outright and the other is disabled — not an average. Mapping their hundred-plus coats onto genotypes , if the patch wants to preserve existing horses. That is a content project, not a code one, and probably should not be attempted: a fresh world is the cheaper answer and matches this mod’s no-back-compatibility rule . Version reality SWEM targets Forge 1.16.5 and 1.18.2. This mod targets NeoForge 26.1.2. There is no version on which the patch could currently be installed, and there would not be until either project moves. A SWEM patch is therefore a 1.12.2-backport-era or later conversation, not a near-term one. SWEM Lite is a reduced distribution of the same mod, so the analysis above applies to it unchanged, minus whatever content it drops. Icy’s Better Horses A horse-overhaul mod that works the way this one does — it enhances the vanilla horse rather than replacing it — which makes it simultaneously the most compatible in architecture and the most directly overlapping in features. It adds ownership and a 0–100 bond stat that grants speed and jump bonuses at thresholds; fifteen named real-world breeds with breed-specific coats, gendered breeding, biome-locked wild spawning and stat inheritance; upgraded saddles with gear slots, horse chests and ender chests; stabilizers, medkits and hitchposts; auto-ride, free-look, two-rider support and a command wheel. Read that list against horse care , breeds and breeding and the problem is obvious: we both implement bond, breeds, gendered breeding, stat inheritance and biome spawning, and we do all five differently. Their bond is a flat percentage buff; ours is four behaviour tiers. Their breeds are fifteen named presets; ours are JSON founder distributions over a genome . Their foals inherit stats plus a random bonus; ours resolve stats from a genotype and never roll. A patch would be a division of territory, and a fairly clean one: They keep the equipment layer entirely — saddles, slots, chests, medkits, hitchposts, stabilizers — and the riding-feel changes. Nothing in this mod touches any of it. We keep coat, genome, breeding and inherited stats, because that is the whole of what this mod is and their version is explicitly the simpler one. Bond has to be picked, not merged. Two bond numbers on one horse is a bug generator. Either their percentage buff reads our bond value, or ours is disabled and our tier behaviours read theirs. The first is less work and keeps both mods’ UIs honest. Their breeds become a breed file each. Fifteen named breeds is exactly what the breed format is for; expressing Thoroughbred or Friesian as a founder distribution is authoring work, not engineering, and the result is strictly better because the horses then actually carry the genes. Spawning must be de-duplicated — both mods add biome spawns, so installed together you get both. Mechanically it is the most tractable patch on this page: both mods hang data off the vanilla horse, so seams 1 and 2 are free and only seam 3 (their renderer, if they replace it for breed coats — unconfirmed) and seam 4 need work. Note also they require GeckoLib and Modonomicon, and they ship for Fabric 26.2, NeoForge 1.21.1 and Forge 1.20.1 — again, no shared version with this mod today. Horseman A quality-of-life riding mod: hitching a mounted horse to a fence, a copper horn that summons bound horses, horses that swim when you press jump, horses that fit in boats, better camera handling, step-up increases, reduced mining penalty while mounted, horse/player inventory switching, dismount direction fixes. This should work out of the box, and it is the best-matched mod on the page. It touches controls, movement and interaction; it does not touch the horse’s model, renderer, textures, attributes or coat, so all four seams are clear. It also targets 1.21.10 through 26.2 on NeoForge, so unlike SWEM and Icy’s it is a mod this could genuinely be installed alongside today. Two things to check rather than assume: Its copper horn overlaps our whistles , and the roadmap wants to take that further still ( callable horses ). Not a conflict — two items that both recall a horse is redundancy, not breakage — but if a patch is ever written the right move is to bind the two to one notion of “your horse” rather than have each keep its own. Its swimming may collide with ours. This mod has its own riding-through-water handling ( see architecture ) and a magical swim-speed locus. Two mods changing how a ridden horse behaves in water is the one place they overlap in substance. It also already ships three of the tweaks we harvested from the quality-of-life cluster — the reduced mining penalty while mounted, horse/player inventory switching, and horses in boats. That is an argument for reading rider comfort and the HorseInBoat row against this mod before building any of them: a player running Horseman would get each behaviour twice, and the cheapest version of some of these may be a recommendation rather than an implementation. Superb Steeds — a second answer to a question we are also answering Superb Steeds (MoriyaShiine, All Rights Reserved) was read from source on 2026-09-21. It matters more than most rows here for one reason: it has a branch targeting NeoForge 26.1.x, which is our own version , and it is actively maintained. Most of the overlapping mods on this page cannot be installed beside this one at all; this one can. It replaces vanilla's per-horse stat variance with uniform base stats — health 30, speed 0.16875, jump 0.5 — by mixing into generateMaxHealth , generateJumpStrength , generateSpeed and setOffspringAttribute , and then hands each horse a 1–5 star rating in speed and jump that is trained upward by riding it : roughly six minutes in the saddle per level, rendered as star icons beside the horse inventory screen. It looks like a head-on collision with the genetics, and it is not Its base-stat flattening never reaches us. We overwrite base values from the genotype on every join — HorseRecords.applyTraitsToEntity — so whatever Superb Steeds wrote at spawn is replaced by ours the next time the horse loads. Its setOffspringAttribute mixin is moot for the same reason: our foals resolve their stats from a genotype and never inherit an attribute. What does survive is its training. Star levels are applied as AttributeModifier s, and modifiers compose on top of our base values exactly as the attributes section says they do. So a horse in a world running both mods has our genome plus its stars — which is not breakage, but it is a second progression quietly stacking on the first. That makes this an unusually close call rather than a refusal, because horsemanship is this mod answering the same question : both say riding should make a horse perform above its raw numbers. The difference is where the gain lives. Superb Steeds writes it to the animal, so the horse is permanently better and carries it when sold; ours belongs to the pairing of one rider with one horse and exists only while you are mounted. Two training systems on one horse is a bug generator , the same argument that sits on bond under Icy's Better Horses : one of them has to be picked, not merged. Planned: detect it and say so , the way Realistic Horse Genetics detection is planned. The bad outcome here is silent — a player sees stars climbing on a horse whose genome says otherwise, and has no way to know which mod is talking. A line at load naming both mods costs almost nothing and is worth more than any patch. Three of its smaller tweaks are separable from all of the above and were harvested rather than refused: feeding a mounted horse by looking down at it , leather horse armour letting a horse cross powder snow , and skeleton horses ignoring soul sand's slowdown . Its “a tamed horse needs no saddle to steer” was not taken — we already do that better, gated on bond, as bareback steering at tier 3 . Note the licence is All Rights Reserved: it was read for understanding, and nothing may be copied from it. Mods that only change horse armour No issues, and there is a structural reason rather than a lucky one. Horse armour in 26.1.2 is an equipment layer: the renderer adds a SimpleEquipmentLayer with its own model and its own EquipmentClientInfo , drawing from minecraft:textures/entity/equipment/horse_body/* . That is a separate texture, a separate model and a separate draw call from the coat. Our generated coat goes on the base layer and knows nothing about it; an armour mod adds items and equipment assets and knows nothing about the coat. The one caveat is the same as everywhere: an armour mod that also replaces the horse renderer in order to add its layer, rather than adding a layer to the existing one, collides on seam 3 like anything else would. That is unusual and would be a design mistake on their part, but it is the thing to check first if an armour-only mod somehow breaks coats. Bale mods — a horse eats any hay bale Asked for Bale of Sugar Cane ( baleofsugarcane ), which compresses nine sugar canes into a block built with Properties.ofFullCopy(Blocks.HAY_BLOCK) — a hay bale in everything but name, which horses nonetheless ignored completely. As of 2026-09-19 a horse grazes one, heals beside one, and takes one from the hand, on vanilla’s own hay numbers. It is written as a tag, not as a check for that mod. horsegenetics:hay_bales exists in both the block and item registries and holds vanilla’s minecraft:hay_block plus any other mod’s bale as a required: false entry. The next bale mod joins by datapack and touches no Java — including a datapack a player writes themselves. Why a tag was not enough on its own This is the part worth reading before writing anything similar, because vanilla is inconsistent with itself. AbstractHorse.isFood is a tag ( minecraft:horse_food ), so adding a bale to it is genuinely enough to make a horse want one: temptation, taming, the bond grant, and Horse.mobInteract taking its food branch instead of mounting the player. But AbstractHorse.handleEating — the method that decides what the food actually does — is a chain of itemStack.is(Items.X) with no tag anywhere in it. So a tag on its own produces the worst of both: the horse accepts the bale as food and then heals nothing, ages nothing, and never consumes it, forever. compat/HayBales supplies vanilla’s own hay-bale branch instead — 20 health, 180 seconds off a foal, no temper — and cancels the interaction. A full-health adult gets nothing and keeps its bale, which is exactly what vanilla’s own bale does. Vanilla’s hay_block is deliberately excluded from the handler and left to vanilla. A special-diet horse is left to HorseDietHandler end to end, so nothing is fed twice or fed the wrong amount. A wheat-eater and an eat-anything horse both take a bale (a bale carries no FOOD data component, so DietFoods.isEdible misses it — that is the one tag exception in an otherwise list-defined file). The portal is framed in cobblestone now, so the question of whether a modded bale is also a doorway has gone away entirely — a bale from another mod is food and nothing else, which is what this page always wanted it to be. Another mod’s crops and fruit, off the floor The same shape, one rung down and asked the other way round. As of 2026-09-24 an ordinary horse picks food off the ground by the common tags — c:crops , c:foods/fruit , c:foods/vegetable , c:foods/berry , c:mushrooms , plus #minecraft:small_flowers and cake — rather than by vanilla’s eight-item #minecraft:horse_food . Any mod that tags its grain, fruit or vegetables the way NeoForge asks is fed to horses without this mod naming it, which was the reported problem: on a heavily modded server almost nothing anybody drops is in vanilla’s tag. A mod that tags nothing is still invisible here — the fix for that one is a datapack adding its items to c:crops , not Java. See what counts as dropped food ; hand-feeding is unchanged and still vanilla’s. The cost of the trade, and the tripwire for it. Grazing hay used to be st.is(Blocks.HAY_BLOCK) in Java and is now a datapack lookup, which buys the extensibility above at the price of a new silent failure: rename either tag file or break its JSON and every horse in the game stops eating hay at all , with nothing logged and no crash. The gametest horsegenetics:hay_is_still_a_bale asserts vanilla’s bale is still in both tags. It was confirmed to fail, with that message, by emptying the tag — a tripwire nobody has watched trip is not a tripwire. Unverified: the two mods have never been run together. The ids were read out of baleofsugarcane-neoforge-1.0.0+26.1.2.jar itself rather than guessed, which matters here because they do not match each other — the block is baleofsugarcane:baleofsugarcane and the item is baleofsugarcane:baleofsugarcane_item . A wrong id costs an absent optional tag entry and nothing else. Horse Powered Animal-labour machinery: a horse grindstone, chopping block, press, drying rack, granite anvil and an energy generator, driven by attaching a leashable mob to a block. It targets NeoForge 26.1.2 among others, so it is directly installable alongside this mod today. The mechanism is the interesting bit. Attached workers become a virtual ghost render : the real mob is stored on the block so it cannot be killed, despawned or wander off. That means two things for us, and both need checking in-game rather than assuming: Storing and restoring the entity must preserve the attachments. Our genome, pedigree, bond and cooldowns live on data attachments. If the block serialises the mob with a full NBT round-trip they survive; if it reconstructs a fresh horse from a subset of fields, the horse comes back with a new genome and a different coat . That is the single failure mode to look for, it is silent, and it would look to a player like the horse changed colour in the mill. The ghost render has to go through our renderer to be painted at all. If it draws the mob itself with a hand-rolled path rather than the registered entity renderer, a working horse renders white while a loose one renders correctly — cosmetic, obvious, and diagnostic of exactly which path it took. Beyond that there is no overlap: it adds blocks and consumes labour, we add genetics and coats. It is a good pairing conceptually — a mod that makes a horse’s strength matter is a mod that makes our MSTN / LCORL stat genes matter. Our half of the patch is built As of 2026-09-18, every horse carries a horsegenetics:draft_power entity attribute . 1.0 is an ordinary horse; a well-bred draft horse is around 1.6 . A machine that multiplies its work rate by that attribute respects horse genetics and is done. It is an attribute rather than an API call deliberately: attributes are the one channel every mod already knows how to read, they are synced, they survive whatever container the other mod stores the animal in, and neither mod ends up depending on the other’s jar. For a caller who would rather ask in Java, HorseDraft.workRate(LivingEntity) is the same number. The value is not pulling ability alone . It is a weighted geometric blend — 60% pull, 40% speed — so torque is what a mill mostly wants but a quick draft horse still beats a ponderous one. Reading pull alone would have made speed a dump stat on any horse destined for machinery. See carts for the same rule applied to wheeled loads, and common/cart/CartDraft.workRate . What is still missing is their half. Nothing here reaches into Horse Powered’s classes: this mod has never been built against that jar, its block-entity and field names are not known here, and a reflective patch against guessed names would fail silently the first time they renamed anything. The attribute is real and useful on its own; the code that reads it has to be written against their actual API. HorsePoweredCompat.announce() writes one line to the log if an animal-labour mod is installed, saying what to multiply by. Unverified : the mod ids it looks for are guesses — Horse Powered has never been installed alongside this mod, so no id has been seen to match. A wrong id costs one absent log line and nothing else. The two risks above — whether their capture preserves our attachments, and whether their ghost render goes through our renderer — are untouched by any of this and still need a real install to settle. Jade — and the rule this one breaks Point at a mare with Jade installed and her state appears in the tooltip: Pregnant , In heat , Nursing , or no line at all. Nothing to switch on. Stallions and foals say nothing, exactly as they say nothing on the information screen. This is the first third-party jar the mod compiles against Everywhere else on this page the rule is absolute: nothing reaches into another mod’s classes. Horse Powered states why — names that a mod never promised can be renamed without warning, and a patch written against guessed ones fails silently. The reason that argument does not apply here is that Jade publishes a plugin API and versions it . Building against a published API is the opposite of guessing at private names: if it breaks, it breaks at compile time in this repo rather than silently in somebody’s world. It stays compileOnly — the jar is never shipped and never required, no code here refers to JadeHorsePlugin , and Jade finds it by scanning for @WailaPlugin , so without Jade the class is never loaded at all. Why it says a word and not a sentence There are now three readouts about breeding, and they are deliberately unequal: Where What it tells you What it costs Jade tooltip Pregnant / In heat / Nursing a glance Information screen the same, plus how long is left and which heat she is in opening her screen The vet’s kit twins , where in the heat she is, whether a stallion has covered her an item you had to make No countdowns in the tooltip , and nothing at all for a mare simply between heats. A tooltip is on screen whenever you glance at a horse, so a ticking “about 4 min to go” would churn in the corner of your eye across a whole paddock — and in a world with debug.tools on, where a heat lasts a minute, it would never sit still. A glance asked no question, so it gets no answer unless there is something worth saying. ReproTextTest pins both the words and the silences. It is not owner-gated , and that is not an oversight: the same fact is already on the information screen of any horse a player can look at, including horses they do not own. Nothing is newly visible here — it is the same fact, one glance sooner. With Jade on the client only The heat model is not synced — no client needs an embryo’s genome — so the real answer is computed server-side and only arrives if Jade is installed there too. When it is not, the tooltip falls back to the one fact the client does hold: pregnancy is a synced boolean, kept so the client can refuse a breeding food without asking. So a client-only Jade still says Pregnant and stays quiet about heat and nursing, rather than going blank. Unverified in either configuration — see verification . Horse Combat Controls Mount-and-Blade-style directional steering: forward accelerates, back decelerates, left and right steer, with a key to toggle between vanilla and combat control modes and a server config to lock players into one. It changes controls and nothing else — no entity, model, renderer, texture, attribute or AI change. No conflict on any seam. It is a client input mod and we are a server-side data model with a client renderer; the two do not meet. The only thing worth noting is that this mod adds an ATTACK_DAMAGE attribute to horses and a melee goal, so a horse here can fight — which makes combat steering more useful than it is in vanilla, not less compatible. Version support stops at 1.21.4, so like most of this list it is not currently co-installable. AstikorCarts Carts pulled by other entities — a supply cart with double-chest storage, a plough, and an animal cart. It adds cart entities and attaches them to existing pullers; it does not modify the horse’s model, texture or rendering, and the puller list is configurable so any entity can be added. No conflict. All four seams are clear: it hangs a second entity off the horse rather than changing the horse. The one thing to watch is our whistle recall , which teleports horses — teleporting a horse that is pulling a cart is exactly the sort of thing that leaves a cart behind, stretched, or attached across dimensions. If a patch is ever wanted, it is one check: do not recall a horse that is pulling something, or drop the cart first, the way we already drop a lead. The practical obstacle is age. AstikorCarts is Forge-only and stops at 1.19.2, and its own author points at Astikor Carts Redux (Forge) and NiftyCarts (Fabric) as the maintained successors. Any real work here should target those, and the analysis carries over unchanged — they are the same design. Resource packs, Fresh Animations, and EMF / ETF A category apart, because it is where most people’s “better horses” actually come from. Better Horses x Fresh Animations by CanineGray is a resource pack , not a mod: it needs OptiFine, or the modern replacements Entity Model Features and Entity Texture Features, to supply a custom entity model and animations for the horse. Today that pack and this mod ignore each other completely, in the worst way. We never sample the vanilla horse textures — our template is horse_white.png in our own namespace — so the pack’s art never reaches a coat. And if EMF replaces the horse mesh, our body-space projection is describing a model that is no longer on screen, so every pattern lands somewhere arbitrary. Both halves have a planned answer, and they are separate pieces of work: The texture half is the resource-pack template plan : read the player’s own minecraft:textures/entity/horse/horse_white.png at whatever resolution the pack drew it, and paint the genome onto that . It costs a namespace change plus an un-mirroring pass plus making the sheet size a variable, and it makes every horse resource pack in existence work with this mod automatically. The mesh half is the remap format . An EMF .jem file is a box-and- texOffs description already, which is very close to the shape a remap needs — close enough that reading one directly, rather than asking the pack author to write a second file, is worth considering before inventing a format. Neither is built. Together they would turn the biggest current incompatibility — “this mod ignores your horse pack” — into the mod’s best feature. Worth running beside this mod Everything else on this page is about conflict. This section is the opposite: things that add what this mod deliberately does not, and touch nothing we own. Investigated 2026-09-15 and 2026-09-17; neither has been run beside this mod in a real game. Custom Fences and Walls Nine styles of fence, fence gate and wall — classic, wildlife, decoration, plank, garden, bollard, stick, crisscross and spire — each in many wood and colour combinations, and each able to mix two woods in one block, which vanilla’s cannot. Strongly recommended beside this mod (owner’s call): a mod whose whole loop is horses standing in paddocks wants more than one kind of fence, and vanilla gives you one per wood. No conflict to expect. It registers blocks in its own namespace and touches no entity, renderer, attribute or recipe this mod owns. The only overlap is in subject rather than in code: this mod ships double-wide fence gates of its own, for leading a horse through without a gap a foal can slip out of. Versions, read off its listing on 2026-09-17: Forge since 1.12.2, Fabric since 1.18, NeoForge since 1.21.4, published up to 1.21.10 — so confirm it loads on 26.1.2 before relying on it , and note its own warning that block remapping does not work on 1.21.x. GPLv3, client and server, and the author explicitly permits modpack use. BHAR — Balanced Horse Armor Recipes Adds crafting recipes for leather, iron, golden and diamond horse armour and for the saddle, so they are craftable rather than loot-only. Recommended: it fixes the thing this mod’s breeding loop makes most obvious, which is that you end up with far more horses than tack. No conflict. It adds recipes for vanilla items only — no entity, rendering or attribute surface at all. The single failure mode is a recipe collision if this mod ever adds its own saddle or horse-armour recipe, which is exactly what neoforge-26.1.2/tools/check-recipes.mjs exists to catch. Licence is the only friction. Fyoncle’s custom licence forbids redistribution of any part, modified or not, and reusing “parts or the whole project” needs explicit prior permission. So we may ship a collision check ; we may not ship a copied recipe file. Bridle Splits mounting from steering across every rideable mob: a saddle only lets you sit, and a second species-specific item is needed to steer. Horses, donkeys and mules take a bridle; equipped gear renders on the mount and drops on death. Cannot be installed beside this mod today, so the conflict is theoretical. It is Fabric-only on Minecraft 26.2 — no NeoForge build and no 1.21.x build exists. If one ever appears, two seams collide: it draws its gear on the horse model (seam 3, the renderer ), and it gates riding control, which sits upstream of our AI and attribute work (seam 4). It is also All Rights Reserved with no public source , so its mixins, attribute writes and goal edits cannot be inspected — the conflict above is read off its feature description, not its code, and should not be quoted as more than that. At three files all from July 2026 and a very small download count, it may not persist. Realistic Horse Genetics Biologically accurate coat-colour genetics for horses, donkeys and mules, with heritable speed, health, jump and size, and gene testing by using a book on a horse. By sekelsta; over two million downloads. Incompatible by construction — this is a competitor, not a patch target. It models extension, agouti, dun, cream and pearl, gray, silver dapple, KIT, frame overo, splashed white, leopard complex and PATN1, champagne, mushroom and tiger eye, plus hidden flaxen, sooty and rabicano; and it puts the body stats under genetic control to push breeding over hunting. That is our gene registry, our hidden modifier layer and our resolved-not-rolled stats, arrived at independently. It also replaces the vanilla horse entity, as we do. Two mods that each own coat generation and each replace the horse cannot both be in charge; whoever registers last wins. There is also nothing to test against: it stops at 1.20.4 , published October 2024, so no build runs on 26.1.2. And its code is LGPL-3.0-or-later, which sits badly against this mod’s CC BY-NC — reading it for ideas is unrestricted, copying from it is not. The only thing worth building is a friendly detection : if it is present at load, log “these two mods both replace the horse; run one” rather than letting a player find out as a half-broken world. One pattern here is worth borrowing, and it is about us, not them. This mod is in RHG’s position rather than a tack mod’s: we re-render the horse, so a third-party armour or tack texture authored against the vanilla mesh lands on our geometry with the wrong UVs. RHG’s answer is a namespace-scoped override — its HorseArmorer checks the texture’s namespace and silently substitutes its own re-unwrapped copy for the handful it knows about ( minecraft and one other), passing every other namespace through untouched. That is the right shape for us too if we ever re-unwrap the horse: fix the textures we can, never silently mangle a third party’s. Read from their source 2026-09-15. Horse Tack Vanilla-styled craftable tack — racing, western, English, jumping, halters, saddle pads, blankets and a draft harness, advertised as 381 textures at 16 colours per category. Code by sekelsta, art by misteriawolfe. Not installable beside this mod, and on modern versions it is an RHG addon. It stops at 1.20.1 (August 2023), and from 1.16 onward CurseForge lists Realistic Horse Genetics as a required dependency — so “compatibility with Horse Tack” transitively means compatibility with RHG, which the entry above rules out. The licence is split, and the split is the whole story. The GitHub LICENSE.txt puts sekelsta’s code under MIT and explicitly blesses reuse as reference code provided the mod id changes; the CurseForge distribution as a whole, including the 381 textures, is All Rights Reserved. So the code may be reimplemented freely and not one texture may be copied — and the art is the reason the mod is popular. Whether to build tack natively instead is a roadmap question, not a compatibility one: see the roadmap tab . Their source was read in full on 2026-09-15, and there is no code in it. The mod is two Java files — a twenty-line @Mod class and one file containing 381 literal register("name") calls. No render layer, no model, no equip handler, no attachment, no mixins, no events. A tack piece is new HorseArmorItem(0, texture, props) hung on vanilla’s existing horse armour slot, and the rendering is RHG’s, not theirs. The protection 0 is load-bearing: RHG’s isArmor accepts an armour item only when getProtection() == 0 , which is how a decorative blanket passes for armour. There is no compile dependency on RHG anywhere — the coupling is that RHG substitutes its own entity and renderer, and the textures are authored for its mesh, so without it they land on the vanilla model with misaligned UVs. Recorded because it settles a question rather than leaving it open: reimplementing their code would save no work, because every API it touches is gone. HorseArmorItem no longer exists, and the texture-on-item hook the whole mod hangs on was replaced by the equipment/<name>.json asset system. Their ~90 “blanket + halter” combination items exist only because vanilla gave a horse one armour slot; 26.1.2 has SADDLE and BODY , so that combinatorial tax is gone by construction. What transfers is a taxonomy and two cautionary lessons, both on the roadmap . Known-good and known-bad Kind of mod Verdict Resource packs retexturing horses Fine — ignored, we generate our own texture Mods adding tack, saddles, armour, storage Fine — we touch none of it. We add horse armours of our own for their metals , in our namespace; theirs are left alone Mods adding a wood, an ingot, a gem or a dye Better than fine — we read them and build for them Mods adding horse-adjacent items or food Fine Mods adding new equine entity types (donkeys, unicorns, their own mob) Fine — we only claim minecraft:horse Performance / rendering mods (Sodium and friends) Should be fine; the coat is a DynamicTexture upload, nothing exotic Mods that add horse spawns Works, but densities stack Mods that set horse base attributes Overwritten on join; use modifiers instead Other horse-genetics / coat-generation mods Incompatible — two answers to one question Mods replacing the horse model or renderer Incompatible Mods replacing minecraft:horse with a subclass Incompatible — our attachments never reach it And the named mods analysed above. “Version” is whether it can be installed alongside this mod at all today , which for most of this list is the binding constraint rather than any technical conflict: Mod Overlap Version Verdict Horseman Controls, hitching, swimming, a summoning horn NeoForge 26.x Should just work — check swimming and the horn Horse Powered Stores the mob on a block, ghost-renders it NeoForge 26.1.2 Check the attachments survive capture, and that the ghost uses our renderer AstikorCarts / Redux / NiftyCarts A second entity attached to the horse Forge, 1.19.2 No conflict; whistle recall should refuse a horse pulling a cart Horse Combat Controls Client input only 1.21.4 No conflict on any seam Horse-armour-only mods A separate equipment layer n/a No conflict — different texture, model and draw call Icy’s Better Horses Bond, breeds, gendered breeding, stat inheritance, spawning Fabric 26.2 / NeoForge 1.21.1 / Forge 1.20.1 Heavy feature overlap, easy architecture — the most tractable patch here SWEM / SWEM Lite Its own entity, model, gaits and tag-based coats Forge 1.16.5 / 1.18.2 Complementary in principle; blocked on a non-box mesh and on versions Better Horses x Fresh Animations (pack + EMF/ETF) Replaces the horse mesh and textures from a resource pack Pack-side Ignored today; both halves have a plan and neither is built Custom Fences and Walls Nine fence, gate and wall styles, in its own namespace Forge / Fabric / NeoForge, listed to 1.21.10 Strongly recommended; confirm it loads on 26.1.2 BHAR Crafting recipes for vanilla saddle and horse armour 26.1.2 (datapack) Recommended; only watch for a recipe collision Bridle Gear drawn on the mount; gates riding control Fabric, 26.2 only Cannot co-install; ARR with no source, so unassessable Realistic Horse Genetics The same loci, the same hidden genes, the same stats — and replaces the horse 1.20.4 Competitor, not a patch target; detect and warn Horse Tack Tack items; requires RHG from 1.16 on 1.20.1 Blocked transitively by RHG; MIT code but ARR art Unverified Nothing on this page has ever been run against a real third-party mod. That is the single sentence to carry away from it. The conflict analysis above is read off this mod's own source and off how NeoForge's registries and events work, not off a play session with a modpack; the rows marked "fine" are predictions, and the renderer row is the only one that is a certainty. The named mods are described from their own public listings, not from their source — so every claim about what they do or do not touch is their description of themselves, and the two failure modes that matter most (whether Horse Powered's capture preserves data attachments, and whether Icy's Better Horses replaces the renderer for its breed coats) are exactly the ones a listing does not answer. Treat this page as the map of where to look when something breaks, not as a compatibility report. What the generated content has and has not been shown to do The section above is the newest thing here and needs its own honesty, because “it generated a pack” and “it works” are very far apart. It was exercised on a dedicated server against a synthetic test mod — tools/compat/build-test-mod.mjs builds a fake mod with one wood and two metals, because doing nothing correctly is indistinguishable from being broken and there was no other way to tell them apart. Confirmed by that run: The scan finds the wood and the metals out of the jar, and the pack is written. All three fingerprint states behave: it generates, it short-circuits and writes nothing on an unchanged mod list, and it wipes the folder when the mod is removed. Zero datapack parse errors, and Done() on every one of those launches. The test mod found a real bug on its first run — a mod can declare an item in a tag and never register it, and the generated recipe then failed to parse in three walls of red. The existence check is what was added, and what was then verified. Not shown, and not to be written up as working: No real third-party mod has ever been installed beside this one. A synthetic jar is a jar somebody wrote to be found. The first real mod will be the first test of every assumption about how mods actually lay their files out. No generated recipe has ever successfully parsed , because the test mod declares items it never registers — so what was verified is the skip, not the recipe. The recipe shape is the same as the twelve shipped gate recipes, which do work, which is the only reason to expect it to. Nothing has been seen rendering. Not a modded gate in a world, not a tinted armour on a horse, not its inventory icon. The greyscale plate was measured and never looked at, and a gate model that points somewhere wrong is a purple chequerboard that logs nothing . Two mods that both add “maple” produce two items both called “Maple Double Fence Gate”. The ids differ, so nothing is ambiguous to the game, only to the eye. The mod’s name is deliberately not in the label, because “Biomes You’ll Go Maple Double Fence Gate” is worse to read for the far commoner case where there is only one maple — but the clash has not been seen and nobody has judged how bad it looks. Every modded ingot is worth exactly iron and every modded gem exactly diamond , with nothing in between and no way to tell a mod’s endgame alloy from its tier-one one. That is a real flattening and it is not an oversight — nothing better is readable in time — but 167 metals at two values is a lot of sameness, and nobody has played with it to say whether it reads as boring or as unobtrusive.
