The genetics model
(Start here)
Alleles are objects, not letters in a string. A horse carries one AllelePair per registered Gene , plus an epigenome — a priority and a set of literal numbers riding on each allele copy . Everything below lives in common/genetics/ and imports nothing from Minecraft.

Start here The genetics model Alleles are objects, not letters in a string. A horse carries one AllelePair per registered Gene , plus an epigenome — a priority and a set of literal numbers riding on each allele copy . Everything below lives in common/genetics/ and imports nothing from Minecraft. The pieces Type What it is Gene An interface: the alleles a locus defines, how they segregate, and how the locus changes the coat. One singleton instance per gene. Allele One allele of one gene. Identified by <modauthor>.<gene>.<token> , e.g. horsegenetics.splash.Spl . AllelePair The two copies a horse carries at one gene — an unordered combination, put in a canonical slot order on construction so a pair equals its reverse. Expression One outcome a gene can produce: a name, a human-readable description, whether it is a wild type, whether it masks, and the paint function. Replaces DominancePattern entirely. FounderTable How common each allele combination is in the wild population, as percentages. Replaces the old per-allele “1 in N” frequency. Genotype One AllelePair per registered gene. Round-trips through a code string. AlleleEpigenetics (int priority, EpiValues values) — the heritable payload on one copy of one allele. EpiSchema / EpiValue What a gene declares it writes on a copy ( Gene.epiSchema() ): each value’s name, kind, design range and founder distribution. EpiValues The literal numbers themselves, read by name. EpiRoll rolls a founder’s; EpiDrift nudges them at each breeding; EpiCodec writes and reads them as text. Epigenome One AlleleEpigenetics per copy, aligned slot-for-slot with the genotype’s pairs. Genome Genotype + Epigenome . The thing a foal actually inherits. breedWith takes an optional per-parent GameteBias — what a breeding carrot does. GameteBias / CarrotEffect A per-parent modifier on the breeding draw (re-roll epigenetics / prefer the dominant or recessive copy / substitute a pair for one gene), and the sealed set of carrot effects that fold into one. NONE is bit-for-bit the plain draw. GeneRarity Six tiers. Gene.rarity() (default UNCOMMON ), hasGeneCarrot() and spliceTable() are the §19 metadata the carrot economy and the gene database read. Genes The registry. Three orderings: codeOrder() , naturalOrder() , magicalOrder() . GenotypeCatalog Every visually distinct genotype the registry can produce, in a stable order. GeneSpec / SpecGene A gene described as a JSON file rather than a class, and the Gene that answers everything from it. Indistinguishable from a hand-written gene everywhere below this table. The genotype code string A Genotype is held internally as a map keyed by gene, and serialises to one gene-keyed segment per gene, in Genes.codeOrder() . Each segment is <geneKey>=<a>/<b> — the full Gene.key() , then the two alleles in the gene’s own declaration order; segments joined by - , alleles by / : a wild-type-ish horse — the first few of the 17 gene segments horsegenetics.extension=E/e-horsegenetics.agouti=A/a-horsegenetics.silver=z/z-horsegenetics.matp=Cr/N- … Allele tokens can be any run of characters — Spl , Cr , prl , Mzeb , Blupnk — not single letters. The = , / and - separators (and the gene key, which contains none of them) keep that unambiguous. The forward-looking rule for third-party genes is stricter: alphanumeric tokens, 1–128 characters, wild type named n . Parsing is tolerant — a gene is added or removed, nothing else Genotype.parse looks each segment's gene up by key , not by position. A registered gene with no segment reads as its wild type; a segment naming a gene that is not registered is dropped; the empty string is the all-wild-type genotype. A bad allele token on a known gene is still a hard error. So adding or removing a gene is just a coat regeneration — no padding, no version field, no positional / legacy fallback. A gene mod registers through RegisterHorseGenesEvent , and no third-party gene has ever actually been registered — see what is still unrun on the gene API . Gene priority and the derived orderings Every Gene declares an int priority() — a fixed constant of the gene, no default. Genes keeps a single order: every registered gene, built-in and data-driven alike, sorted on (priority, key) . The three public views are a result of that one sort, never a source: codeOrder() / all() is the whole list, naturalOrder() is it filtered to isNatural() , magicalOrder() to the magical genes. Ties break alphabetically by key. A data-driven natural gene at priority 45 lands between the built-in MATP (40) and champagne (50) — loaded genes are not appended. Bands are a convention: 0–99 natural, 100+ magical — the phase ( isNatural() ), not the number, splits the two coat passes, and Genes.register only warns when a gene sits outside its band. Within the natural band, low numbers set pigment absolutely, higher numbers dilute (agouti's absolute points must precede PigmentField.dilute ). Built-in priorities were chosen to reproduce the pre-rewrite hand-written order, so no coat changed. This is not AlleleEpigenetics.priority , which selects a seed and never an order. Alleles, combinations and expressions A gene has any number of alleles . A horse carries two, and order does not matter, so a gene with n alleles has n ( n +1)/2 combinations — three for two alleles, six for three, 465 for a thirty-allele KIT . Every combination produces some result , and the gene says which by declaring its distinct results as Expression s and mapping any pair to one of them with expressionOf(AllelePair) . There is no dominance property anywhere in this model “Dominant” and “recessive” are shorthand for which combinations happen to share a result . They only describe a two-allele locus, and they cannot say what a third allele does without inventing a fourth word. The combination table says all of it directly, and says it for any number of alleles: several combinations landing on one outcome is what “dominant” meant — E/E and E/e both wild type; only the double-variant landing on a non-wild-type outcome is what “recessive” meant — Hlr/n is a carrier because it maps to a wild type, not because of a label; two variant alleles each with their own outcome and a third for the pair of them is codominance — MATP is exactly that. None of them needs a name, and none of them needs a special case. What an expression carries Field What it means id The gene’s slug for this outcome, unique within the gene and stable. Two expressions are equal when their ids match, and the catalogue dedups allele pairs by it. name Short display name — “Sabino-white”. description One human-readable sentence: what this combination does to the horse. What the gene dictionary, the tooltips and these wiki pages show. wildType This combination changes nothing . No painter, skipped by the composer, excluded from the texture key, reads as “absent” in the genome display. A property of the combination , not of an allele. masks While this shows, no other gene is visible — dominant white, frame lethal white. Also per-combination: w/w does not mask, W/w does. deterministic Every horse with this combination is painted byte-for-byte identically. A false anywhere forces per-horse texture generation. the painter Either a phase-1 restrict (a natural gene) or a phase-3 tint (a magical one) — never both, because a gene is one or the other. Both are pure: handed read-only views, they return a contribution. Sabino, whose three combinations land on three different outcomes private final Expression WILD = Expression.wildType("No white markings."); private final Expression SABINO = Expression.of("sabino1", "Sabino 1") .describe("Tall jagged stockings, a splash of white up the belly, ...") .varies() .restrict((ctx, coat) -> paintSabino(ctx, coat, 1)); private final Expression SABINO_WHITE = Expression.of("sabino-white", "Sabino-white") .describe("Ninety per cent white or more, with a few coloured flecks ...") .varies() .restrict((ctx, coat) -> paintSabino(ctx, coat, 2)); @Override public Expression expressionOf(AllelePair pair) { return switch (pair.count(SB1)) { case 2 -> SABINO_WHITE; case 1 -> SABINO; default -> WILD; }; } A gene may declare more than one wild type when different silent combinations deserve different wording — MATP’s prl/N is a “pearl carrier”, distinct in the gene dictionary from the plain N/N even though the two horses look identical. The catalogue collapses every wild type into one entry, because “changes nothing” is one look . The genotype-aware question A handful of genes depend on another gene: agouti paints black points, so it does nothing at all on a chestnut horse. Those override expressionIn(pair, genotype) , which defaults to expressionOf(pair) and is what the coat pipeline actually calls. An override may only return one of the gene’s own declared expressions — typically a wild type, meaning “suppressed here”. A data-driven gene can do this too now. An expression in a gene file may carry a needs block naming another locus and a copy count, and SpecGene implements expressionIn and coatDependsOn off it. That is the whole of the addition: no new concept, just a way to reach the hook the leopard complex has used since long before the file format existed. Accretion is the gene built on it — one locus decides whether there is a pale field and what colour it is, and Accretion Field , which paints nothing at all and which every horse carries, decides whether it takes the topline or the underside. Founder frequency, per combination Gene.founderTable(FounderContext) returns a FounderTable : a weight per allele combination , as percentages that should sum to 100. One nextFloat() per gene per founder picks a bucket, drawn in codeOrder() , so a founder’s genotype is reproducible from the RNG stream. Founders only — breeding never consults it. This replaces the “1 in N per allele” frequency each gene used to hand-roll, for two reasons. It has no meaning past two alleles — “1 in 45 per allele” says nothing about a locus with thirty of them. And it hid the number the author cares about : a per-allele chance only implies a homozygote rate, where a per-combination table lets you set it directly. The two splash loci are the clearest case — a majority of MITF founders carrying one SW1 and none at all homozygous is a shape no allele frequency can produce, because Hardy-Weinberg’s heterozygote share peaks at 50% and always brings homozygotes with it. The table is sparse : a combination left out simply never turns up in the wild. That is what lets a thirty-allele locus declare the dozen combinations that actually occur instead of all 465. Weights that miss 100 are normalised proportionally with a warning, not an error. FounderTable.hardyWeinberg(variant, baseline, p) is a convenience that computes the three numbers a two-allele author would otherwise work out by hand — it is what the old “1 in N” meant, not a second model. The multi-allele overload is hardyWeinberg(Map<Allele, Double>, Predicate<AllelePair>) , and KIT is why it exists: thirty-six combinations, four of them ruled out, is not a table anyone can hand-write without a typo nobody would ever see. Excluded combinations are dropped and the rest rescaled , which is also the biology — a lethal is absent from the adult population you are observing. FounderContext carries the part of the genotype already rolled, so a gene’s frequency may depend on what the horse already is (“champagne twice as likely on a chestnut”). Genes roll in codeOrder() , so a gene can only read genes with a lower priority; asking about a later one throws rather than quietly handing back a wild type that would make the bug invisible. The forty-eight registered genes The table is in codeOrder() — the one (priority, key) sort every ordering is derived from — so it doubles as the list of the numbers the built-ins occupy. Low numbers set pigment absolutely, higher ones dilute; 80–99 is the non-coat sub-band and 100+ is magical . Six of them are white-pattern loci , and they are six because real white patterning is six genes. Only alleles at exactly the same locus share a gene here: sabino and the numbered W series are all KIT variants, so they are one gene; splash lives on MITF and PAX3 , so it is two; and tobiano (an inversion near KIT , not a KIT variant), roan (region-mapped, causal change unresolved) and frame ( EDNRB ) each keep their own. That is what lets a horse be tobiano and W20 and splash at two loci — and what stops it being sabino and dominant white at once. Pri. Gene Alleles Outcomes In the wild Phase 1 sex X / Y mare, stallion — both wild types 50 / 50, no Y/Y neither (paints nothing) 10 extension E / e wild, chestnut 25 / 50 / 25 natural 20 agouti A / a wild, bay 25 / 50 / 25 natural 30 silver Z / z wild, silver 1/60 per allele natural 32 mushroom Mu / mu wild, mushroom-carrier, mushroom 1/34 per allele natural 34 dun D / d1 / d2 wild, primitive-marks, dun§ 1/24 D , 1/10 d1 natural 36 brindle Brn / n / Y ● wild, brindle-carrier, brindle 2% per X — 2% of stallions, 0.04% of mares natural 40 MATP Cr / prl / N wild, pearl-carrier, single-cream, classic-pearl, double-dilute 1/30 Cr , 1/300 prl natural 50 champagne Ch / c wild, champagne 1/40 per allele natural 55 grey G / g wild, grey 1/16 per allele natural 60 tiger eye TE1 / TE2 / N wild, tiger-eye-carrier, tiger-eye-amber, tiger-eye-yellow 1/70 per allele — but 26% of Puerto Rican Paso Finos natural (eyes only) 68 natural zebra Zeb / n wild, shadow-striped, zebra-striped 1/60 per allele natural (codominant) 70 roan Rn / rn wild, roan 1/30 per allele natural 72 tobiano To / to wild, tobiano 1/50 per allele natural 73 leopard complex LP / lp wild, mottled, varnish-roan, leopard, fewspot, blanket, snowcap, semi-leopard 1/40 per allele natural 74 EDNRB — frame O / N wild, frame, lethal-white (masks) 1/55 per allele; no O/O founder natural 76 KIT — white spotting W22 / W13 / W10 / W5 / W23 / SB1 / W20 / N wild, minimal-white, modest-white, sabino, broad-white, extensive-white, near-white, dominant-white (masks) * W20 6%, SB1 2.2%, the rest under 1% each; four homozygotes cannot occur natural 78 MITF — splash SW3 / SW1 / SW5 / N wild, splash, splash-bold, splash-extensive SW1 4%, SW5 0.6%, SW3 0.4%; no SW3/SW3 natural 79 PAX3 — splash SW2 / SW4 / N wild, splash, splash-bold 90% SW2/N , 1% SW4/N ; heterozygotes only natural 80–92 the thirteen non-coat genes — see the table below 93 PATN1 PATN1 / n wild only — a silent modifier 0 unless the founder rolled LP neither (paints nothing) 94 PATN2 PATN2 / n wild only — a silent modifier 0 unless the founder rolled LP neither (paints nothing) 112 mane colour Mnsld / Mnstrp / n wild, solid, striped, solid-striped 2.0% / 1.5% per allele magical 114 tail colour Tlsld / Tlstrp / n wild, solid, striped, solid-striped 2.0% / 1.5% per allele magical 116 healer Hlr / n wild, healer-carrier, healer 9% per allele magical 120 magic zebra Mzeb / n wild, zebra 1/100 per allele magical 130 milk Watr / Lava / n mares-milk, milk-carrier, water-milk, lava-milk, milk-lethal — all wild types 8% / 6% per allele; no Watr/Lava neither (paints nothing) 140 magic body size Big / Small / n six combinations, six outcomes — codominant, and all wild types 80% carry one copy ; no homozygote is ever wild neither (paints nothing) 141 magic speed Swift / Sluggish / Vmp / n ten combinations, ten outcomes — codominant, all wild types 82% carry one copy (two in a hundred the dhampir’s Vmp ); no homozygote is ever wild neither (paints nothing) 142 magic health Hardy / Frail / Vmp / n ten combinations, ten outcomes — codominant, all wild types 82% carry one copy (two in a hundred the dhampir’s Vmp ); no homozygote is ever wild neither (paints nothing) 143 magic jump Springy / Leaden / Vmp / n ten combinations, ten outcomes — codominant, all wild types 82% carry one copy (two in a hundred the dhampir’s Vmp ); no homozygote is ever wild neither (paints nothing) 149 magic pull Strong / Weak / n six combinations, six outcomes — codominant, all wild types ; a score , not a multiplier, and no Vmp 80% carry one copy ; no homozygote is ever wild neither (paints nothing) 150 particle 40 variants / n wild + 40 single + 46 codominant double — all wild types 0.1% per variant allele neither (paints nothing) 160 light Lthf / Ltmn / Lteye / n wild + six regions, codominant‡‡ 0.5% per variant allele magical 180 verdant mush / moss / grass / n wild, verdant-carrier, mycelium, moss, grass — all wild types 6% / 7% / 8% per allele neither (paints nothing) 190 LUT n / Blupnk / Grnpnk wild, a carrier wild type per palette, bluepink , greenpink ~1 in 60 carry each copy; no homozygote is ever a founder , and a mixed pair is the wild type magical — swaps the phase-2 gradient (no phase-1 or phase-3 paint) 196 cutie mark Cutmrk / n wild, cutie-mark-carrier, cutie-mark — all wild types 6% per allele (recessive) neither — a client render layer draws a 1-3 item emblem on both flanks over everything 690 extreme white dominant EWD / n wild, white-dominant 1/320 per allele neither — it paints nothing and changes the fold instead This table is the built-ins; the whole order is a page The hundred-odd data-driven genes take their slots by the same rule and are not listed here, because a hundred rows of numbers typed into a wiki page is exactly the thing that goes stale . The paint order draws every gene that paints, highest first, from the registry at run time. It is the place to look for what covers what. ● Brindle is the model’s only sex-linked gene. Its Y is not an allele a horse can express — it is the reserved placeholder a hemizygous stallion’s spare slot holds, meaning “this locus is not on the Y”. That is what lets a genotype stay one two-slotted AllelePair per gene with no structural change, and it is why a stallion carrying brindle displays as X-Brn rather than beside a fake second copy. See its page . Mane and tail colour are the model’s first genes whose heterozygote paints with two allele copies at once , one colour each, which is why they need CoatBuildContext.epigeneticsForCopy rather than "the copy that expresses". ‡‡ Light is the clearest codominance in the model : three variants, each dominant to the wild type and to none of each other, so a horse shows everything it carries — ten combinations, seven outcomes, and no ordering of three alleles that could describe it. * KIT is the locus that broke the last of the old model. Eight alleles, thirty-six combinations, and four of them homozygotes that are thought nonviable — so canOccur rules them out and the founder table is the survivors, renormalised. It also settles a genotype the old model allowed and biology does not: a horse can be homozygous sabino or dominant white, never both, because they are alleles of one gene competing for two slots. See its page . O/O is one of the model’s two kinds of lethal. An embryonic lethal is a horse that never existed ( canOccur false, no pen, no founder) — KIT ’s four W homozygotes, and MET ’s met/met . Lethal white is the other kind: the foal is born, so it occurs, it has its own masking all-white outcome and it gets a pen — it is simply never a founder, because a founder is an adult that survived. The death is modelled; see the horse’s body and its page . The leopard complex was the model’s first cross-locus gene , and accretion is the second — the first to do it from a file rather than from Java. LP reads PATN1 and PATN2 in expressionIn to pick one of eight outcomes (leopard, fewspot, spotted blanket, snowcap, semi-leopard, or the plain LP looks). The modifiers paint nothing on their own, so they carry Gene.affectsCoat() false and would be left out of the texture key — LP.coatDependsOn() names them and coatCode() folds their alleles in, but only for a horse that actually has LP . A founder draws a variant PATN copy only if it already rolled LP . See its page . § Dun is the locus with two dominance orders. Dilution reads D > d1 = d2 but marking reads D = d1 > d2 , so d1 draws the dorsal stripe without diluting anything — a horse with primitive markings that is not a dun. No single dominance label covers both orders, which is the clearest case yet for the table. See its page . Sex was the first gene that never paints , and is no longer the only one. Both its outcomes are wild types, so it costs the catalogue nothing and is left out of the texture key; it is registered at priority 1 so a future sex-linked gene can read a sex that is already resolved, and so a foal’s sex is inherited rather than rolled. See its page . The thirteen that never paint Every outcome of every gene below is a wild type , which here means “changes nothing about the coat ”. So affectsCoat() is false for all of them, they are out of the texture key, and the catalogue collapses each locus to a single entry — thirteen genes for zero catalogue growth, which is the sex locus’s trick reused. What they do instead goes through common/trait/ : the machinery is on the horse’s body , and each gene has its own page. Their order among themselves is arbitrary, because none of them can reach another through the coat. Pri. Gene Alleles In the wild What it moves 80 MSTN C / T p( C ) = 0.35 codominant : each C is +0.020 speed and −2 health 81 PDK4 A / G p( A ) = 0.25 +0.018 speed per copy 82 CKM T / C p( T ) = 0.20 +0.015 speed per copy 83 RYR2 J / n p( J ) = 0.20 +0.09 jump strength per copy 84 LCORL L / n p( L ) = 0.30 height: +0.05 scale, +0.010 speed, +0.02 jump per copy 85 HMGA2 p / N p( p ) = 0.25 pony: −0.06 scale, −0.008 speed, −0.02 jump, +2 health per copy 86 ACAN D1 / D2 / D3 / D4 / N 0.4% per variant; affected combinations excluded dwarfism. Five alleles, fifteen combinations ; affected is “no working copy left”, so D1/D4 counts. D1/D1 is lethal at birth, every other D/D is scale ×0.70 and −6 health 87 B4GALT7 d / N 4.0% carriers Friesian dwarfism — scale ×0.75, −5 health. The one disorder a horse lives with 88 PLOD1 ffs / N 2.6% carriers fragile foal syndrome — lethal at birth 89 RAPGEF5 efih / N 1.4% carriers EFIH — lethal at birth; the most severe and the rarest 90 ST14 nfs / N 1.8% carriers naked foal syndrome — lethal at birth. The bare coat is not drawn 91 SHOX sa / N 2.0% carriers skeletal atavism — lethal at birth. Pseudoautosomal, so it segregates like an autosome 92 MET met / N 3.0% carriers lethal at conception — canOccur false, and the pairing produces no foal at all 93 SCN4A H / N 1.2% affected — there is no carrier HYPP. Dominant, and the first locus that is both a survivable disorder and a lethal : H/N is −6 health and rideable, H/H is lethal at birth. Founders can be born H/N , because a dominant that never reached a founder could never exist 94 GYS1 P / N 2.5% affected — there is no carrier PSSM1, tying-up. Dominant and neither combination is lethal , which makes it the mildest locus here and by far the one a player is most likely to meet 95 PPIB herda / N 3.4% carriers HERDA, fragile skin — −7 health, survivable. The highest carrier rate of any recessive here, because the real thing hides in the working lines a breeder would choose 96 PRKDC scid / N 2.8% carriers SCID — lethal at birth. No immune system at all 97 MYO5A lfs / N 2.2% carriers lavender foal syndrome — lethal at birth. The only lethal whose real presentation includes a colour , and it is deliberately not drawn 98 TOE1 ca / N 2.4% carriers cerebellar abiotrophy — survivable, and the heaviest jump penalty in the mod . Progressive in reality; flat here, because there is no age model 99 CVM cvm / N 1.6% carriers cervical vertebral malformation — lethal at birth. No confirmed causal variant ; one locus is the mod's simplification, and the page says so 100 GBE1 gbed / N 2.0% carriers GBED — lethal at birth, and the largest heart reduction in the mod 101 Megaesophagus meg / N 1.7% carriers lethal at birth, and the gentlest of them on the numbers — the failure is mechanical, not systemic. Also has no confirmed causal variant No founder is ever affected. Every health founder table lists only the clear horse and the carrier, because a wild-caught horse is an adult that survived — so the only way to meet a disorder is to breed two carriers. Four colour genes carry one as well: silver Z/Z is MCOA (and Z/z the free cyst phenotype), EDNRB O/O is lethal white, and a homozygote at either splash locus ( MITF / PAX3 ) is deaf — one condition with two causes, de-duplicated by id. Seal brown has no allele of its own. Neither has blood bay nor liver bay: all four bays are bands of one shade score , which the shade locus, MC1R dosage, ASIP dosage and a per-horse roll add up between them. Agouti declares the four as outcomes and picks between them by reading the rest of the genotype. Cream and pearl are one gene , and so are dominant white and sabino: they are allelic in real horses ( MATP and KIT respectively) and are now one locus each, which kills the impossible Cr/Cr - and - prl/prl genotype the old two-gene model allowed. See its page . Dun is the other three-allele locus , and the one that shows why a dominance label could never have worked: see its page . Sex-linked inheritance Every gene in the model is autosomal except one. Gene.inheritance() declares AUTOSOMAL (the default), X_LINKED or Y_LINKED , and brindle is the gene that made it worth building: a stallion has one X , so he carries one copy and can never be a carrier , while a mare needs two. That asymmetry produces pedigree shapes no autosomal gene can. The reserved slot A genotype stays one AllelePair per gene, two slots, always . A hemizygous horse fills the slot it does not really have with a reserved placeholder allele the gene declares: Mode Mare X/X Stallion X/Y AUTOSOMAL two real alleles two real alleles X_LINKED two real alleles one real allele + reserved Y Y_LINKED two reserved X reserved X + one real allele That is what keeps the change small. Genotype is untouched, epigenome alignment is untouched (the reserved slot simply carries epigenetics nothing reads), the code string keeps its shape, and parsing needs no special case because the placeholder is a declared allele like any other. The placeholder must be declared at the end of alleles() that its slot sorts to — Y last on an X -linked gene, X first on a Y -linked one — because AllelePair canonicalises on declaration order. Genes.register refuses a gene that gets this wrong, since the failure otherwise is not an exception but a gene that quietly misbehaves for exactly one sex. What changes in breeding The sire's copy is decided by the foal's own sex rather than drawn. The sex locus is priority 1, so it is always already resolved by the time any other gene is reached. On an X -linked locus the sire gives his X -borne allele to a filly and his Y — nothing — to a colt; Y -linked is the mirror. The dam is unchanged in both. The second coin is still flipped and thrown away. Two nextBoolean() per gene is an invariant a great deal leans on — the golden coats, the gamete-bias equivalence test, every claim that adding a gene shifts the stream by a known amount — and a locus that quietly consumed one would make the random stream depend on a foal's sex. Gene.sexConsistent drops combinations no horse of either sex could carry, so the catalogue does not enumerate them and the random splice cannot roll them. Gene.realAlleles(pair) — two for a diploid horse, one for a hemizygous one, none for a mare at a Y -linked locus — is what a sex-linked gene's expressionOf counts. “Every real copy is Brn ” covers recessive in mares and always shows in stallions in one sentence. The founder table has to be sex-aware, and a hemizygous one is written out rather than derived from Hardy-Weinberg — Hardy-Weinberg is a statement about diploid loci and this one is not. On screen a hemizygous copy carries an X- / Y- prefix ( X-Brn ), unambiguous on sight because - is the gene separator in a code string and can never appear inside an allele token. The code string itself is unaffected. Epigenetics ride on the allele, not on the horse A genotype says which alleles a horse carries. It does not say what those particular copies are carrying, and every copy carries two things: a priority — an int in [1, Integer.MAX_VALUE] , used only for the homozygote tie-break below; a set of literal numbers — one per value the gene declares in its epiSchema() : how much white a splash covers, how much bigger a magically large horse is, how far up the legs a bay’s points climb. So a foal that inherits a copy inherits that copy’s numbers — the A a bay got from its dam brings the dam’s point height with it. Bay point heights run in families rather than being reinvented every generation. A wild-type copy carries nothing Since 2026-09-14 (owner: “wildtype for most genes should not carry any epigene data” ), only a copy of a variant allele carries numbers. A copy of a gene’s wild-type allele — the a in A/a , the n in Swift/n — carries none, not even a priority. That copy is never the one a painter or an ability reads, so its numbers were dead weight: about half of every stored epigenome, inherited and drifted for nothing. A survey of every gene that stores epigenetics found no gene that expresses its wild-type copy in an outcome that does anything, and WildCopySurveyTest keeps that true. The survey could not see fertility , whose wild outcome does nothing visible but whose number is an n/n mare’s fertility. Emptying it crashed a world at the first natural cover, so FertilityGene overrides Gene.wildTypeCarriesEpigenetics() . That makes it the one exception. A future gene whose wild type reads its number has to say so the same way. One reader the survey could not see: the white-pattern eye roll ( WhitePatternEyes.blueIf ) reads a white locus’s copy whenever the horse is white enough, even at a wild locus. An empty copy there asks for nothing (owner: “eyes should default to brown if nothing else describes them” ); the variant white locus that made the horse white still rolls the blue. Genome fits its epigenome to its alleles when it is built ( Epigenome.alignedTo ), so every horse passes through the rule. A copy that arrives empty on a variant allele — forced eyes, or an editor changing the allele — is given deterministic numbers. And a reader that still lands on an empty copy gets the gene’s schema midpoints ( Epigenome.readable ), not an exception. An empty copy describes nothing, so it reads as the gene’s default. These used to be one opaque seed A copy carried a single long , and every gene recovered its numbers by replaying a PRNG off it in a documented draw order . That was compact and completely unreadable: “how much jump does this copy add” could only be answered by running the gene, and the position of a draw was the meaning of each number — so inserting one while tuning a gene silently rewrote every horse in the save. Values are stored literally and read by name now. It costs a great deal more space (an epigenome code went from tens of characters per gene to a couple of hundred, and is only written for the genes that actually vary), and it buys a genotype a player can read, edit and select on. That was the owner’s call and the reason for the whole rewrite. Three kinds of value, because drift cannot treat them alike Kind What it is How drift treats it SCALAR A magnitude — how much white, how much bigger, how wide. Nudged continuously. Nudging it a hair makes a horse a hair different. SEED The long behind a noise field — the shape of a splash, a streak, a set of spots. Never nudged. There is no “slightly different” splash, so it is replaced whole or not at all — and almost never. CATEGORY An index into a list the gene owns — a particle body site, an iris wedge. Never nudged, for the same reason: a boundary nudge would silently move a horse’s particles from its mane to its tail. Colours are three SCALAR channels ( <name>_r / _g / _b ) rather than one packed int, so a line’s colour drifts gradually instead of jumping. A founder’s is still rolled bright — hue over the whole circle at a held-up saturation and value — because a magical mane that rolled a muddy olive reads as a bug. Founder distributions are declared, not flattened A value names the distribution its founders are rolled from: uniform, a bounded Gaussian, or a power curve. That matters because the genes were deliberately skewed — ednrb’s cover is a power curve so most splash horses carry a little white and a few carry a lot; the magical stat deltas are Gaussian so a single copy is usually subtle. Rolling everything uniformly would have been simpler and would have quietly changed the character of the wild population on every one of them. Which copy expresses Case Expressed copy Two different alleles The canonically first copy — the earlier-declared allele. An arbitrary but fixed choice, not a claim about which allele “wins”: what the combination does is its expression , which reads both. Homozygote Both copies express, so the tie goes to the higher priority . That is what Epigenome.expressed(gene, genotype) answers, and its values are what CoatBuildContext.epigeneticsFor(geneKey) returns. Priority selects a seed, never an order Epigenetic priority ( AlleleEpigenetics.priority ) picks which copy’s values express . It can never move a gene in the processing queue, and by design it never will — if it could, two horses with the same genotype and the same values could diverge on priority alone and silently share a coat cache entry. It also never drifts : it is an ordinal deciding a tie, not a magnitude, and a horse whose expressed copy silently swapped between generations would be inexplicable. Gene processing order is a separate per-gene constant, Gene.priority() ( Genes sorts on (priority, key) ). See Philosophy §2 and § Gene priority above. The epigenome code string One <geneKey>=<copy>/<copy> segment per gene that declares a schema , joined by ; . Each copy is p:<priority> followed by that gene’s named values: a plain number, # for a hex noise seed, [a|b|c|d] for a per-leg value. A wild-type copy, which carries nothing, is written - , and a gene whose two copies are both wild type writes no segment at all. horsegenetics.body_size=p:1734,delta:0.34215/-;horsegenetics.ednrb=p:44,seed:#8f3a21c4b70e1d55,face:0.61,cover:0.4113,…/- Two things changed shape here. Genes join with ; rather than - , because values are signed now and a hyphen can no longer double as a delimiter. And the majority of genes write nothing at all — a gene whose behaviour is fixed by its alleles declares an empty schema, which is what keeps the code readable now that each stored gene carries a couple of hundred characters instead of a sixteen-digit seed. Parsing is tolerant the same way the genotype code is: an unregistered gene’s segment is dropped, and anything the schema declares but the text omits — a gene, or one value inside a gene — is rolled deterministically from the gene key and the value’s name , so every horse in the world agrees on it. Every value is quantised to what the text can write the moment it is created, so a horse’s numbers in memory are exactly what its code says. That is not tidiness: a value that lost a digit on the way to disk would give a horse a subtly different coat after a reload than before it, and the two would fork the texture cache without ever looking different enough to notice. Epigenome.fromSeed(long) replays a whole epigenome from a single long — a reproducible test and tooling horse, used by the golden-coat suite, the coat sample sheet and the designer preview. It is not a stand-in for a horse whose epigenome was not stored; FamilyTreeScreen used it that way and drew ancestors that never existed, and that fallback is gone. Founders roll; foals inherit Founder (wild spawn, /summon , a dimension pen horse) — Epigenome.random(rng) : an independent priority and an independent roll of every declared value on every copy, deconflicted. Reached through CoatGenerator.generate , which is the founder path, and through BreedFounder for a breed . Foal — Genome.breedWith . Every inherited allele brings its parent copy’s priority verbatim and its numbers nudged by drift . A foal must never go through the founder path. If both copies arrive on the same priority, one extra nextBoolean() bumps the second 1 ( AlleleEpigenetics.deconflict ), clamped to [1, MAX] — so a horse never carries a tie. Full inheritance detail is on the breeding page . What the texture key captures CoatData.textureKey() is the genotype’s coat code , plus @<fingerprint hex> only when the horse is non-deterministic . Epigenome.visibleFingerprint(genotype) digests only the expressed values of genes that are both visible and non-deterministic, so epigenetics a horse cannot show do not fork the cache. It folds in every stored number rather than a single seed — getting that wrong does not throw, it silently forks the cache or collides two horses onto one texture. Genotype.coatCode() is the full code minus every gene that can never paint anything — Gene.affectsCoat() , derived as “is any of my outcomes not a wild type?”. Today the sex locus is the only such gene, and leaving it out is what stops a mare and a stallion of the same colour baking two identical textures. It is not a persistence format: it is lossy on purpose and nothing parses it back. common/genetics/Genotype.java — the two questions the cache asks /** Is every gene's contribution identical on every horse with this genotype? */ public boolean isDeterministic(); /** Does any *visible* gene need per-horse randomness? -> bake per horse. */ public boolean hasVisibleNonDeterministic(); Gene.isVisible(pair, genotype) and Gene.isDeterministic(pair, genotype) both see the whole genotype — both derive from expressionIn(pair, genotype) , which is how agouti knows it is invisible on a chestnut. Declare determinism honestly Claiming determinism you do not have poisons the coat cache for every horse sharing your genotype: the first horse to bake wins, and the others render its coat. This is the single most damaging mistake a third-party gene can make. The genotype catalogue GenotypeCatalog enumerates every visually distinct genotype the registry can produce. Nothing is hard-coded — it falls out of codeOrder() , each gene’s allele list and each gene’s expression table, so registering a gene widens it on its own — the catalogue is built lazily and thrown away whenever the registry changes, which is what makes a drop-in gene show up in the catalogue without anything else being told about it. allPairsOf(gene) Every unordered pair a horse can carry — all n ( n +1)/2 of them ( ee , Ee , EE ), minus any the gene rules out with canOccur . Only the sex locus does: there is no Y/Y horse. distinctPairsOf(gene) One representative per distinct Expression — the homozygous pair where the group has one. Every wild type is one group, because “changes nothing” is one look. totalGenotypes() The raw product — every distinct heritable genotype. size() The reduced catalogue — how many of them are distinct to look at. get(i) / entries() Read an entry. Nothing is materialised — size() is arithmetic and get(i) reads a mixed-radix odometer, because a two-million-entry List<Genotype> is hundreds of megabytes. entries() is a lazy view : streaming it still walks all of them, so sample it or ask the arithmetic. Two reductions, both read straight off the expression table with no dominance metadata in the middle: pairs landing on the same expression collapse to one, and a gene on a masks expression keeps exactly one entry — that combination with every other gene at a wild type, which is why a masking combination keeps just one pen instead of hundreds of thousands. Ordering is a mixed-radix odometer whose first gene is the fastest-varying digit, so the catalogue reads Nothing in the game reads it any more. It used to drive the horse dimension, one pen per entry; that corridor went back to random pens on 2026-09-04, because at two million entries the corridor was longer than the world. The catalogue stays because the tests read it and a punnett display will — the reduction is a statement about the genes, not about the dimension. Phenotype, coarsely Genotype.phenotype() gives a coarse CoatPhenotype ( CHESTNUT / BLACK / BAY / WHITE ; everything else ignored). It is only a family-tree fallback now — foals and adults alike are fully generated through the coat pipeline . Breeding & pedigree Three-phase pipeline Class abstractions Writing a gene Source: common/src/main/java/com/example/horsegenetics/common/genetics/ Genes that never paint Half the registry changes nothing about a horse’s colour — the genes for which Gene.affectsCoat() is false, counted off Genes.codeOrder() : the sex locus , the six performance and size loci, the seven health loci, the two leopard-complex modifiers ( PATN1 , PATN2 — read by LP , but never painting themselves), and the magical genes that paint nothing either — milk , verdant , particle , and the five magical body-stat genes (size, speed, health, jump and pull ). Every combination they can produce is an Expression marked wildType . That reads oddly for a gene that can kill a foal, and it is exactly right: wildType means “changes nothing about the coat ” . It is the property the coat pipeline asks about, and nothing else. What these genes do instead travels on the trait system — speed, max health, jump strength, body scale, and the disorders a horse expresses. Three consequences follow, and together they are why the non-painting genes are nearly free: Gene.affectsCoat() is false, so they are excluded from Genotype.coatCode() . Two horses that differ only in them share one baked texture . GenotypeCatalog.distinctPairsOf collapses every wild type into one group, so each contributes one catalogue entry however many alleles it has — ACAN ’s five alleles and fifteen combinations included, and verdant ’s four — and particle ’s forty , 861 combinations collapsing to one entry — and each leopard-complex modifier ’s three combinations collapsing to one. The catalogue stands at 11 098 128 386 distinct coats. The particle locus and the body-stat genes left it untouched; the two genes that do change the coat — the two-outcome LUT locus and now the leopard complex (coarse expressionOf : wild or varnish-roan ) — each doubled it. That tipped GenotypeCatalog.size() past Integer.MAX_VALUE , so it (and get() ) are long now; nothing in production indexes the catalogue. The raw genotype count — GenotypeCatalog.totalGenotypes() , which is the one place it is kept — is multiplied by a new locus’s whole combination count every time one is added, and every genotype in it is real, heritable and distinguishable, just not by colour. (The leopard complex’s three loci, three combinations each, multiplied it by 27; magic pull ’s six combinations by six.) It is a BigInteger , and has to be : the particle locus pushed the product past 2 63 , and the figure this page carried until then — 3 028 898 126 035 238 912 — was a long that had already wrapped. The true count before particle was 94 874 633 669 214 259 200 000. The magical utility and body-stat genes stretched the phrase further than the health loci did, and it still holds. A lava-bearing horse is emphatically not “the same as an ordinary horse”, and a ten-times giant is the most visible thing on the field — but neither changes a coat pixel , and the coat pipeline is the only thing that asks. The cost is real and is logged as a gap: milk and verdant are invisible until you put a bucket under the horse or watch the floor, where healer deliberately draws a stripe so you can see what it does. An expression still carries a name and a description when it is a wild type, which is what lets a carrier outcome say something useful ( MATP ’s pearl-carrier , every health locus’s …-carrier ) without pretending to change the coat. Verified SeededRng scrambles its seed (2026-09-09). java.util.Random 's seed handling is a single XOR, so the first nextFloat() off seeds 0..3999 spanned only 0.58 to 0.95 (mean 0.77), and EyeSpread.roll 's 62/22/16 split measured 100/0/0. The constructor now runs the seed through splitmix64's finaliser (written out, for TeaVM and Java 8): 0.0002 to 0.9999, mean 0.5043. Every horse moved: 883 of 1056 pipeline golden lines and 218 of 623 bake golden lines, exactly the genes that store epigenetics. The same fault had made positions in neighbouring seeds correlated (magic jump's mean over 3000 seeds came out 1.7% high, fifteen standard errors); neighbour covariance at positions 0, 1, 5 and 20 fell from about 0.013 to 0.001, and MagicBodyStatGenesTest 's private splitmix64 workaround was deleted and the test still passes, which makes it a tripwire. Registering a gene moves only that gene (2026-09-09). Epigenome.fromSeed drew every gene from one shared stream, so a locus registered at priority 68 re-drew every gene above it; registering natural zebra broke three WhitePatternGenesTest assertions by margins under 0.05. Each gene now draws from its own generator namespaced by its key ( Epigenome.copiesFor ). Two EpigenomeTest cases pin it (every gene recomputed from (seed, key) alone; the registry walked backwards), and both fail with the shared stream put back. Changing how many values one gene declares still reshuffles that gene, on purpose. Two tests tuned to a single draw were restated as distributions (the splash dose-response, and the grey spread over 24 seeds, about 45 against a threshold of 20). The catalogue is arithmetic, and long (2026-09-04 and 2026-09-06). GenotypeCatalog is not materialised: size() is arithmetic and get(i) reads an odometer, because an eager list of two million genotypes is hundreds of megabytes, and the pen corridor is a fixed 2 000 random pens rather than one pen per entry. entries() is a lazy view, so streaming it still builds everything; sample it. When the leopard complex took the reduced catalogue past Integer.MAX_VALUE , size() / get() went to long ; no production caller indexes it, so only tests changed, and entries() documents that it truncates. CoatPipelineGoldenTest.override throws on an unknown gene rather than silently pinning nothing. Sex-linked inheritance is built, and brindle proves it (2026-09-06). Gene.inheritance() declares the mode; breedWith routes the sire's copy by the foal's sex; Gene.sexConsistent keeps impossible combinations out of the catalogue and the random splice; a hemizygous copy lives in a reserved placeholder slot and displays as X-Brn ; founder tables are sex-aware. Nothing is Y_LINKED yet (the mirror case waits for a gene). The raw-pair display still open is gap 22 . What reads the expression table (2026-09-04 and 2026-09-05). The info panel and paper dump print a horse's expressed Condition s; the spawn-egg editor lists genes by Gene.name() and prints the outcome name under a row that expresses; the Horse Browser and the View Genes popup show every Expression 's name and sentence, its wild type / masks / varies flags, and Gene.description() from GeneDescriptions . What is still unread is gap 10 . The gene-keyed code format did not regress wild coats (owner-confirmed 2026-09-03, after the data-model rewrite that introduced gene priority and <geneKey>=… genotype and epigenome codes). Wild spawns rendered their correct coats under the new codeOrder() , and the right-click paper genome dump worked.
