Magic zebra
(Magical gene / phase 3)
A zebra’s own stripe map, painted in hard black over whatever the horse already is. It subtracts 200% from all three channels — deliberate overkill, and the clearest demonstration of why the phase-3 accumulator is an unclamped signed int : a stripe lands hard on zero and reads black over any coat, without the gene knowing what else the horse carries. The composer’s shadow pass then lifts it off zero to #151515 , because a stripe multiplied at zero would take the template’s strand shading with it.

Gene key horsegenetics.magic_zebra Alleles Mzeb n Outcomes wild, dusky , zebra Shows when Mzeb/n (dusky), Mzeb/Mzeb (black) Default allele n Wild frequency 1 in 100 per allele Founder draws 1 × nextFloat() Deterministic no when expressed Epigenetic draws 1 long + 4 nextFloat Strength −200% per channel at two copies; 0.09 of that at one Field coat.pattern.ZebraStripes Repainted, still not play-tested It used to hang parallel bars from the topline and fade them out partway down, which put vertical bars across the rump and up the face — the two things every field guide says a zebra does not have. It now reads the shared body map . Neither the old shape nor the new one has ever been seen on the actual 3D model , which is where a body-space pattern usually goes wrong. See the Verification tab . Codominant since 2026-09-11 — one copy is no longer the whole horse A single Mzeb copy used to draw the full black pattern, so the locus had nothing at all between a plain horse and a finished one. It now works exactly the way natural zebra does, and for the same reason — a carrier you can see is a carrier you can breed from . There is one painter taking a strength , not two painters, so a dusky parent and its black-striped foal wear the same bands in the same places and the two outcomes cannot drift apart. Mzeb/Mzeb passes 1.0 and is byte-for-byte what this gene has always drawn . Mzeb/n passes 0.09 , which scales the subtraction and the opacity together — scaling only the colour would put a dusky band at full opacity over the white template, which on a dominant white is a grey stripe as strong as the black one. The heterozygote is the one outcome that reads differently on different coats , and that follows from the overkill rather than undermining it. A fraction of a deliberately-too-large number is an ordinary-sized number, so a dusky band is a real darkening of whatever was underneath: obvious on a cremello or a chestnut, nearly invisible on a black horse — which is what a shadow on a black horse looks like. The homozygote is the outcome that promises to read on any coat, and it still does. This is not the natural zebra gene Natural zebra is the real-world locus: it runs in phase 1 and takes pigment away between the bands , so the horse’s own colour survives as the stripes — which is how a real zebra is made. This one is invented, runs in phase 3, and adds black on the bands , which is the only way to stripe a cremello or a dominant white. A horse can carry both and show both. The five epigenetic knobs Drawn off the expressing Mzeb copy, in this order. A foal that inherits the copy inherits the pattern exactly. # Knob Range Effect 1 nextLong() — The stripe field’s seed. 2 spacing 2.0 – 3.8 body units Centre-to-centre on the barrel. The adult barrel is 22 units long, a foal’s 14. 3 width 0.34 – 0.50 of a period How much of each period is band. Narrower than the natural gene’s , and deliberately: this one adds black on the band, so at an even duty the horse simply reads as a black horse. 4 bend 0.4 – 1.4 units of warp How far the noise field may bend a band off its plane. 5 leg reach 0.45 – 1.00 of each leg How far down the legs the rings go — the plains-zebra to Gr vy’s range. So one magic zebra has plain lower legs and another is ringed to the hoof. If it reads more brindle than zebra in-game, widen SPACING_MIN / SPACING_RANGE . The chevron is load-bearing The stripe field is ZebraStripes : on the barrel, bands of near-constant body-space X, warped by BodyNoise so they wiggle and taper. The phase also carries a small slant on |z| , which bends each band into a shallow chevron over the back. Not decoration Without the slant, every face perpendicular to X — the chest, the rump, the front and back of every leg — sits at one phase and renders as a flat band of solid stripe or solid coat. The slant is symmetric left to right, so the horse does not look lopsided, and it varies enough across a constant-X face that the stripes carry on over it. One map, two directions ZebraStripes returns the dark band coverage — 1 inside a band, 0 in the pale gap — because that is the way round the biology has it, and because it is what lets the two zebra genes share one field while doing opposite things with it: // MagicZebraGene, phase 3 - black on the band int amount = (int) Math.round(255.0 * STRIPE_PERCENT / 100.0 * c); // NaturalZebraGene, phase 1 - white in the gap f.whiten(px, py, (float) ((1.0 - c) * strength)); Regions a real zebra keeps solid dark — the dorsal stripe, the muzzle, the tail — come back as coverage 1, so neither gene has to special-case them and the natural one does not whiten them by accident. The full region-by-region map is documented once, on the natural gene’s page . Generic is not the same as shared BodyStripes was reused by magic zebra and brindle on the grounds that both wanted “stripes”, and that is what made both of them wrong: a zebra’s bands are crisp, symmetric and organised round a body map, and brindle’s are soft, broken and deliberately different on the two sides of one horse. They now have a field each. BodyStripes stays as the data-driven STRIPES mask — see the gene format . What it settled Magic zebra and the hair-colour loci together answered the open question about phase 3: Straight signed add stays the blend. Anything fancier — a real overlay or soft-light — reintroduces order-dependence. The unclamped model works in the negative direction exactly as sketched. But magicalOrder() matters more than expected , because a gene aiming at a specific colour reads the accumulator first and is order-dependent by choice. Zebra runs after mane colour for that reason.
