Rainbow dust
(Magical recessive / no coat effect)
Coloured dust off all four hooves as the horse walks, fading from one colour into the next and working its way round the whole rainbow before it starts again. The smallest gene in the mod that anybody will actually want.

Gene key horsegenetics.rainbow_dust Priority 151 — immediately after the particle locus Alleles Rbw n Outcomes wild, rainbow-dust-carrier , rainbow-dust Shows when Rbw/Rbw only Default allele n Wild frequency 0.25% of founders are Rbw/Rbw ; no founder is a carrier Founder draws 1 × nextFloat() Coat effect none, ever Particle dust_color_transition , anchored at hooves Emission while moving on the ground, 50% of ticks, 2 particles a firing Epigenetic one value — how fast the colour turns, 40–300 ticks a lap Not yet play-tested Nobody has watched a horse do this. The two things worth looking at are whether the fade reads as a rainbow at all at hoof scale, and whether the slow end of the cycle range just looks like a solid colour. Checklist on this page’s own verification tab ; the wider particle batch this gene arrived in is on LYCAN’s . Recessive, with no wild carriers One copy shows nothing at all, exactly as at the particle locus and for the same reason: a trail is a thing you breed for. The founder table follows the same rule too. A wild horse is either plain or the whole rainbow — never a carrier — so what you catch is what you watched it do, and the carriers appear one generation later, in the foals of a rainbow horse bred to an ordinary one. The argument is written out in full under the particle locus’s founder table . Combination What you see n/n nothing Rbw/n nothing — a silent carrier, and never a founder Rbw/Rbw the trail How the colour turns: the cycle parameter An emitter carries a fixed color and color2 , which is right for every other user of the verb and useless here — a rainbow is a colour that is a function of time. So the verb grew one parameter: common/genetics/spec/GeneAbility.java record Emitter(String kind, String shape, String anchor, Trigger trigger, int color, int color2, int count, double data, String particle, double chance, int cycleTicks, Condition when, int minDose) implements GeneAbility {} cycleTicks is 0 for every other emitter in the mod, and means “the two colours above are the colours”. Anything larger is how many ticks one full rotation of the hue circle takes, and the translator then recomputes both colours from the clock on every firing and ignores what the gene put in them — color2 a twelfth of a turn ahead of color , so the dust_color_transition fade reads as “red going orange” rather than as two unrelated colours in one puff. It is a parameter rather than a second verb because everything else about a rotating trail — the particle, the anchor, the count, the chance — is the emitter it already was, and a whole verb whose only difference is where two ints come from would be a copy of this one. Any data-driven gene can now say "cycle": 120 and get a rainbow. The hue is counted off the horse’s own tick count rather than the world’s, so two rainbow horses standing side by side are not in lockstep — the same reason the healer ’s aura beats on its own clock. The one thing that varies How fast the rainbow turns, in ticks per lap, drawn on the allele copy and inherited with it. A horse near the fast end (40 ticks — two seconds) strobes; one near the slow end (300 ticks — fifteen seconds) looks like a solid colour that has changed by the time you next look at it. It is one number rather than a colour, and the colour is deliberately not the gene’s to vary: the rainbow is the gene. But two rainbow horses side by side should still not be the same horse, and this is the smallest thing that makes that true. It is a SCALAR , so drift moves it by a hair each generation and a line really can be bred faster or slower — which is the only thing about this gene there is to breed.
