Dun
(Natural gene / phase 1)
Real-horse TBX3 , and the mod’s second three-allele locus. Two effects that come apart: a body dilution that thins black pigment and leaves red almost alone, and primitive markings — a dorsal stripe into the tail, plus leg bars, a shoulder bar and a face mask on the horses that draw them — that read dark because everything around them got lighter. The third allele is the one that carries the markings without the dilution.

Gene key horsegenetics.dun Alleles D d1 d2 Outcomes wild, primitive-marks , dun Combinations 6, landing on 3 outcomes Default allele d2 Wild frequency D 1 in 24, d1 1 in 10 per allele Founder draws 1 × nextFloat() Deterministic no — the markings are rolled per horse Epigenetic draws 1 × nextLong() + 7 × nextFloat(), on both marked outcomes Dilution PigmentField.diluteNeutral — red first, then black keep red / black ( D ) 0.93 of the visible red; 0.42 of the black keep red / black ( d1 ) 0.95 of the visible red; black never touched dorsal half-width 1.5 body units, ×0.80–1.30 per horse leg bars joint 0.56, spread 0.48, spacing 3.2, duty 0.42 — both marked outcomes, per leg D -only marking the face mask / cobwebbing, and nothing else accessory chances bars 0.82 per leg, shoulder bar 0.55, face 0.40 Two dominance orders over one locus This is the gene that most obviously needs a table rather than a label. Dilution reads D > d1 = d2 ; marking reads D = d1 > d2 . Two orders over the same three alleles, and no single word covers both — which is exactly why there is no dominance property in this model, only an outcome per combination . Combination Outcome Dilutes? Dorsal stripe? Accessory markings? D/D , D/d1 , D/d2 dun yes yes bars, shoulder and face , rolled per horse d1/d1 , d1/d2 primitive-marks no yes bars and shoulder, rolled per horse; no face d2/d2 wild type no no no So d2 is the only allele that draws nothing , and it — not the old catch-all d — is the gene’s default allele : the token a code with no dun segment reads as. A horse can carry a dorsal stripe and not be a dun, which is what d1 is for. One dilution and one mask Phase 1 is downward-only — a natural gene can never add pigment back — so nothing here can literally paint a dark line onto a coat. It does not need to. A primitive marking is countershading : “a stripe darker than the body” and “a body lighter than the stripe” are the same picture. So the whole gene is one dilution and one mask . The mask says, per texel, how much of the dilution to lerp back off, and every dark thing a dun has is a region where that number is high. common/genetics/genes/DunGene.java double mark = CoatRegions.dorsalStripe(skin, part, point, m.dorsalHalfWidth()); mark = Math.max(mark, pointRegion(skin, part, point)); // midtstol, ears, muzzle, lower leg mark = Math.max(mark, alreadyAPoint(f.red(px, py), f.black(px, py))); // a bay's black, wherever it climbed mark = Math.max(mark, m.shoulder() * SHOULDER_DEPTH * CoatRegions.shoulderBar(...)); int leg = CoatRegions.LEGS.indexOf(part); if (leg >= 0 && m.bars()[leg] > 0) { mark = Math.max(mark, m.bars()[leg] * BAR_DEPTH * CoatRegions.legBar(...)); } if (drawFace) { // D only mark = Math.max(mark, m.face() * faceMarking(skin, part, point, m)); } f.diluteNeutral(px, py, lerp(keepRedBody, 1f, (float) mark), lerp(keepBlackBody, 1f, (float) mark)); Both marked outcomes run that same painter and differ only in their constants and in whether they draw the face. There is no special case anywhere, and the whole locus stays inside the restrict-only contract. Note what is not in that listing: any test for which allele is painting the bars. There does not need to be one. The mask is a countershade, so a bar is only ever “take less of the dilution off here” — and a d1 horse whose base has no visible red to give up has no dilution there to take off. The marking resolves to nothing on its own, by arithmetic. See d1 : a marking with no dilution . Grullo, and the order the two pigments come off in The dilution is PigmentField.diluteNeutral , not the warm dilute that cream and champagne use. The two are opposites and the difference is an order : red down first, then black . A black horse is (red = 1, black = 1) — a full load of pheomelanin that the eumelanin above it hides, visible nowhere but on the gradient’s bottom row. Scale the two pigments together and the black comes off first , unmasking that red on the way out and walking the sample diagonally into the golds; a “grullo” built that way is a milk-chocolate horse. So the dilution scales the visible red instead — red * (1 - black) — and stores back whatever reproduces it against the black that is left: common/coat/pattern/PigmentField.java black' = black * keepBlack red' = red * (1 - black) * keepRed / (1 - black') Same invariant whiten keeps, and for the same reason, with the two pigments free to move by different amounts. On a chestnut nothing is masked and it collapses to red * keepRed ; on a black horse the numerator is 0, red goes straight to 0, and the sample slides down the gradient’s neutral column into the blue-greys where grullo actually lives. It fixed the leg bars for free The old painter had a special case: a leg bar kept its black only, because re-introducing red on a black leg turned the bar into a warm patch. That was the same unmasking bug seen from the other side. With diluteNeutral a bar is just “less diluted” like every other marking, and the special case is gone. Dun takes black off. It barely touches red. That one asymmetry is what makes the three bases come out as different as they do from a single pair of numbers — and it is why keepRed sits so close to 1. Base What the dilution has to work with Result black No visible red at all — it is all masked — so only keepBlack applies. The sample slides straight down the neutral column. Grullo , and the largest colour change of the three. bay Mostly red under about a third of a load of black. Taking that black off unmasks the red it was damping and the body swings red-brown to tan. Bay dun — a big, obvious change, and none of it is the red moving. chestnut No black to take. Red dun is almost the same colour as chestnut. What keepRed buys is not a dilution, it is just enough countershade to let the markings read at all. A red dun is a chestnut with primitive markings Not a pale horse. If a red dun’s body reads as a distinctly lighter, more golden colour than a plain chestnut beside it, KEEP_RED has been turned down too far — the visible effect of dun on a chestnut is a couple of very subtle markings and almost nothing else. The points, and how a bay dun keeps them A dun dilutes the body coat . The points do not go with it — that is what makes a bay dun a tan horse with black legs rather than a uniformly faded one, and a grullo a blue-grey horse with a black mane. So the mask is 1 on the ears and muzzle outright, 1 down the centre of the mane and the tail, and 1 up the bottom POINT_LEG_SOLID of each leg before fading out over the next POINT_LEG_FADE — a soft transition rather than a ring. That handles a grullo, whose points are only points because of where they are. It does not handle a bay, whose black climbs its legs and face by a rolled amount that can reach most of the way up. For that there is one more line: common/genetics/genes/DunGene.java private static double alreadyAPoint(float red, float black) { return Math.sqrt(black * (1.0 - red)); } The pigment model says it exactly. A gene that paints a point paints it absolutely : BayCoat sets red = 0, black = 1 , and that pair — black with no red under it — occurs nowhere else. A black horse is (1, 1) : black with a full load of masked pheomelanin, which is what makes it a body colour and not a point, and which is what dun is supposed to dilute into grullo. Multiply and the two separate cleanly: 1 for a point, 0 for a black body, 0 for a chestnut, and the partial values through a bay’s leg ramp turn out to be exactly the fade the mask wants. The square root shortens that fade — without it the top of a seal bay’s black leg diluted to a grey cuff between the tan body and the black point, and no real horse has one of those. The midtstol : why the mane is not a flat point The dorsal stripe does not stop where the hair starts. Forelock, mane centre, spine and tail centre are one continuous system on a dun — the Norwegian name for the mane's share of it is the midtstol , and the tail's is the halefj r . So the mane and the tail get a dark band down the middle with pale guard hairs either side, not a rectangle of undiluted base colour. common/genetics/genes/DunGene.java private static double midtstol(Skin skin, Part part, BodyPoint point) { return HairPattern.centreStripe(skin, part, point, MIDSTOL_HALF_WIDTH); } It reuses HairPattern.centreStripe , the shape the healer's red line down the mane already uses, so the band lands on the part's own axes rather than the world's — a mane and a tail are both rotated out of true by their rest pose, and neither “stripes along X” nor “along Y” is right for both. The half-width is set by the mesh MIDSTOL_HALF_WIDTH is 0.25 and that is arithmetic, not taste. A mane is four texels across, so the only two distances from the centre that exist are an eighth of the span and three eighths of it. centreStripe feathers over halfWidth halfWidth/2 , and 0.25 puts those two edges exactly on those two rows: the inner pair is fully dark, the outer pair is fully pale. At 0.20 the feather caught the dark rows too and a bay dun's mane came out at 97 % black instead of black — invisible in a screenshot, wrong in the pigment field. The guard hair is an overshoot, scaled by the dilution The reference calls the outer hairs cream, silver-white or yellowish . A mane diluted only as far as the barrel reads as one colour at riding distance, so the guard hair is diluted past the body by GUARD_HAIR — but scaled by how far that channel is being diluted at all: common/genetics/genes/DunGene.java float over = hair ? (float) (GUARD_HAIR * (1.0 - mark)) : 0f; f.diluteNeutral(px, py, lerp(keepRedBody, 1f, (float) mark) * (1f - over * (1f - keepRedBody)), lerp(keepBlackBody, 1f, (float) mark) * (1f - over * (1f - keepBlackBody))); That scaling is what keeps it a dun feature. A d1 horse takes no black off anything, so its guard factor is exactly 1 and the painter stays the byte-for-byte no-op the tests pin. Guard hair is pale because the dilution is stronger there — it has no reason of its own. A bay dun had no mane stripe at all for a while On the long hair the marking mask caps alreadyAPoint instead of losing to it, and that one line is the whole fix. A bay's mane arrives at the dun painter as red = 0, black = 1 , so alreadyAPoint returned 1 for every texel of it, the painter took its early exit, and a bay dun's mane came out byte-identical to a plain bay's while a grullo got a perfectly good midtstol. Everywhere else the maximum is still right: a leg is a point because it is already black, not because a mask said so. Every dun, not only the Fjord The Fjord is famous for this because the breed clips the mane upright so the pale-dark-pale cross-section is unmissable, and because a pale body makes a dark centre shout. The marking is not breed-specific and it is not a separate locus — a dun is a dun. So it is drawn on every D horse here, at a contrast that follows the base colour: near-black down a grullo's mane, dark red down a red dun's, and most dramatic on a cream-diluted dun, exactly as the field guides describe. The upright clip itself is grooming , and grooming is not modelled. The reference this came from proposed a fictional F “Fjord mane pattern” modifier plus three hidden quantitative loci gating the effect. That is a new system for a marking every true dun already has, and it would have let a D/_ horse with the wrong modifiers show no mane stripe — which the same reference says is not how dun works. Declined; see philosophy on inventing loci. The marking checklist, region by region What a field guide looks for, and what the gene draws for it. Only the dorsal stripe is diagnostic; everything below it is a “sometimes”, which is why the accessories are rolled per horse . Region What a real dun shows What the gene draws Back The dorsal (eel) stripe: withers to dock along the spine, continuing into the tail . The one feature that is actually diagnostic. CoatRegions.dorsalStripe on the barrel, neck, mane and tail, weighted to the top of the box so it does not also land on the belly. Half-width jittered per horse. Legs Short transverse strokes , not bracelets: uneven, often broken part-way round, concentrated at and just above the knee and hock, asymmetric between legs. CoatRegions.legBar , rolled and seeded per leg, on both marked outcomes — faint on a d1 horse, and absent on any leg that is already a black point. Shoulder A bar crossing the shoulder from the withers, down and back — often just a smudgy shadow, sometimes several fine lines. Highly variable. CoatRegions.shoulderBar : one noise-warped diagonal stroke on the front of the barrel, on both marked outcomes . At two texels to the body unit a fan of fine lines is three pixels of noise. Head A darker forehead or full face mask, or “cobwebbing” — fine radiating, branching rings on the forehead. A strong mask tends to replace the web rather than join it. CoatRegions.faceMask (a radial falloff from the forehead) or faceCobweb (noise-warped rings inside that same falloff). One roll picks which; the stronger half of its range goes to the plain mask. The one D -only marking — a masked or cobwebbed face is a strong-dun feature, not something a non-dun carries. Neck A darker crest, sometimes fine marks running up from the withers. The dorsal stripe already runs the length of the neck box and the mane centre is a point, so the crest comes out darker with no extra code. No separate neck bars. Ears, muzzle Dark, in the base colour — black on a bay dun or grullo, red-brown on a red dun. Points : the mask is 1, so the dilution never reaches them. Mane, tail A dark band down the centre , with paler hair either side of it — the midtstol , continuous with the dorsal stripe at both ends. A centre stripe rather than a flat point, and the guard hair outside it diluted past the body. Belly, flank Lighter than the points; some duns show diffuse mottling or rib shading near the flank, many show none. Supportive, never diagnostic. Nothing. A blurry patch that half the duns do not have costs a marking’s worth of noise on a 128px sheet and buys no recognition. Leg bars: strokes, not bracelets The old field was a plain function of y — evenly spaced, equally strong, and identical the whole way round the limb — so every leg wore the same three rings, low down on the cannon. Every clause of that is wrong about a real dun. The rewrite is four separate irregularities stacked on one band phase: Irregularity How What it buys Bands wander The y phase is warped by 3D BodyNoise . A bar reads slightly diagonal and wobbles instead of sitting ruler-flat. No two bars alike A per-band hash on thickness and strength. One long band and one or two shorter, fainter ones — not a comb. Bars break A second noise sample frozen to the band index , so it varies as you walk round the limb and not as you walk up it. A ring becomes a slash; one band becomes two fragments. The majority of bars fade out somewhere round the leg. Legs disagree A different seed and a separate presence roll per leg. Three bars on one foreleg, a smudge on the other, and sometimes nothing at all behind. On top of that, a window peaks at BAR_JOINT and dies out both at the pastern and where the leg meets the body. That is the same fraction of the leg box the point mask is fading out at, which is not a coincidence: the dark lower leg ends at the knee, and the bars start there, on the pale leg above it, which is exactly where a real dun’s read best. Faintest where the leg is already dark On a dark bay dun - a high shade score - there is very little pale leg left, and the bars are correspondingly hard to see — the same thing a field guide says about a real one: a bar disappears visually once it reaches the black lower leg, because there is too little contrast, not because the pigment variation stopped. The markings are incomplete on purpose Leg barring, shoulder bars and forehead rings occur on some duns. A genuine dun may have a striking dorsal stripe and nearly invisible shoulder bars, or clear leg barring and no cobwebbing at all. So each accessory carries a propensity on the expressing copy — a stored number tested against that accessory’s chance, so the tendency is heritable and a line can be bred toward it. A horse regenerates the same markings every session, and a foal that inherits the copy inherits its dam’s. common/genetics/genes/DunGene.java /** absent on (1 - chance) of horses; on the rest, a faint smudge ramping up to full. */ private static double accessory(float roll, double chance) { if (roll >= chance) { return 0; } double t = (chance - roll) / (chance * 0.55); return t > 1 ? 1 : t; } Deliberately not a plain uniform: most of the duns that have a shoulder bar have a hint of one rather than a painted stripe. That ramp lives in the painter, and what is stored is the propensity it reads — seed (the marking field), dorsal_width , shoulder , face , and bar per leg. Both marked outcomes read the same values even though d1 only uses the first two, so a d1 horse that later gains a D copy keeps the stripe it had and gains the accessories it was always carrying. d1 : a marking with no dilution A non-dun horse is by definition undiluted, so d1 cannot paint a dark line on it. It does not need to — it runs the same painter with constants chosen to move as little as possible: Black is never touched ( keepBlack = 1 ), which is the whole of what “non-dun” means here. Taking black off is the half of the dilution that actually changes a horse’s colour , so an allele that does not dilute must not do it. Only the visible red is taken , and only 5% of it — less than D ’s 7%, which is itself barely anything. A chestnut lightens a whisper, a bay body less, a true black or a bay’s points not at all. It draws the bars and the shoulder bar too d1 runs every accessory except the face — leg bars and a shoulder shadow, rolled per horse exactly as a dun’s are, and at the same depths . There is no separate “faint” constant and no allele check in the painter, and both of those absences are deliberate. The faintness is free. A bar is a countershade — “take less of the dilution off here” — so its contrast can never exceed the dilution it is countershading against. For D that is a 58% black take; for d1 it is 5% off the visible red. The same constant therefore produces a bar an order of magnitude softer on a d1 horse without anything scaling it: a chestnut leg, above the point fade d1 body red = 1.00 × 0.95 = 0.950 bar red = 1.00 × 1.00 = 1.000 delta 0.050 D body red = 1.00 × 0.93 = 0.930, black × 0.42 bar red = 1.00 × 1.00 = 1.000, black × 1.00 And the invisibility is free. Where a d1 horse has no visible red to give up, diluteNeutral computes room = 1 - black as zero and never writes red at all — so on a solid black coat, and on a bay’s absolute points ( red = 0, black = 1 ), the bar the horse rolled resolves to nothing. That is the correct answer rather than a missing feature: a real non-dun black shows no primitive markings either. No branch produces it; the arithmetic does. A no-op is the right answer here A d1 horse on a solid black base is composed byte-identically to a plain black one — there is no visible red to take and black is untouched, whatever markings it drew. That is not a gap: a real non-dun black shows no visible primitive markings either. The markings appear on the bases that have red to give up — chestnut, bay, and everything downstream of them. DunGeneTest pins both halves: onlyDunBarsTheLegsOfABlackHorse and d1BarsAChestnutLeg . Founder frequencies The six weights are written out rather than computed, so one row can be retuned without disturbing the others. They are Hardy-Weinberg at p(D) = 1/24 and p(d1) = 1/10 . The three D rows still sum to what the old two-allele table gave, so adding d1 split the non-dun population rather than making duns rarer. Combination % of founders D/D 0.174 D/d1 0.833 D/d2 7.153 d1/d1 1.000 d1/d2 17.167 d2/d2 73.674 So roughly one wild horse in five carries primitive markings without being a dun — common enough to be a familiar sight, and the reason the locus is worth three alleles rather than two. Still simplified Not drawn at all: flank mottling and rib shading (see the checklist above) and ear edging beyond the ears being points. See roadmap . Guard hairs used to be on this list and are not any more — see the midtstol .
