Magic mob aura
(Magical gene / no coat effect)
How everything else in the world feels about the horse. A warding horse keeps mobs outside about ten blocks; a baiting one makes every hostile that can see it pick it over anything else in range, including its rider. Both take two copies, and one of each cancels outright .

Gene key horsegenetics.magic_mob_aura Alleles Wrd warding, Bai baiting, n Priority 135 — the magical utility band, beside milk Reaches the game as a mob_aura effect Coat effect none, ever Verified Ward pushes hostiles away and bait pulls them in (2026-09-15, part of gap 121). The worry was that the repel shove, a velocity nudge, would lose to a pathfinding mob. Repel now also issues a path out to twelve blocks. The yard's WARD pen puts a Wrd/Wrd horse with three husks, and WARD CONTROL a plain horse with three. A minute in, WARD's husks stood 9.1, 13.6 and 15.0 blocks off (mean 12.6); the control's stood 5.3, 5.0 and 3.6 (mean 4.7). In BAIT a husk six blocks from a Bai/Bai horse was targeting it within five seconds and had killed it within fifteen, while BAIT CONTROL's husk never went for its plain horse in a minute. A bait horse really does draw hostiles onto itself and whoever rides it. The compound heterozygote is the interesting row Wrd/Bai produces nothing, and not as a shrug. The two alleles are opposite answers to one question — does a mob want to be near this horse — and a horse carrying one of each is asking for both at once. Rather than pick a winner, or let a ward and a bait fight every tick in the translator, the locus says the pair is silent. It has the same practical consequence as on death ’s mixed pairs: a breeder who crosses their ward line with their bait line gets an ordinary-looking horse that carries and throws both. Repel is a shove, not a wall A hostile inside the radius has its target cleared if it was the horse or the horse’s rider, and is pushed outward. That is deliberately weaker than a real avoidance goal, and the reason is lifecycle: a goal would have to be added to and taken off every mob that ever walked past , and a horse whose aura stopped expressing would leave the goal behind on everything it had ever met. neoforge/server/GeneAbilityHandler.java Vec3 away = mob.position().subtract(horse.position()); if (away.lengthSqr() < 1.0e-4) { away = new Vec3(1, 0, 0); // exactly on top of the horse; any direction will do } away = away.normalize().scale(0.35); mob.setDeltaMovement(mob.getDeltaMovement().add(away.x, 0.05, away.z)); mob.hurtMarked = true; Capped, like every radius effect Twelve entities per beat, one beat a second, counted off the horse’s own tickCount rather than the world’s — so a field of them does not do all of its work on one tick. The same rule the healing aura follows, and every radius effect in the format is required to state a cap.
