Magic fighter
(Magical gene / no coat effect)
What the horse hits for. Wild type is 3 points — a heart and a half. The gladiator allele adds a percentage of that, the wimp allele takes one off, and both copies are added with opposite signs , so a wimp copy really does count against a gladiator one. Against a monster every kick lands twice as hard , so an ordinary horse kicks a zombie for 6 and out-hits it. Players, animals and other horses take the plain number.

Gene key horsegenetics.magic_fighter Alleles Gld gladiator, Wmp wimp, n Priority 146 — the magical body-stat band Reaches the game as a combat effect — the horse’s ATTACK_DAMAGE base value Coat effect none, ever Newly built, not yet play-tested Nothing on this page has been seen in game. The translator was written against the 26.1.2 sources and is flagged as unverified in its own comments. Checklist on the Verification tab . The floor is on the damage, not on the percentage A wimp copy subtracts a share of the baseline, and two unlucky ones after a few generations of drift would take a horse to zero or below. Zero damage is not “a very weak horse”, it is a horse that cannot attack at all, which is a different animal. So the sum is applied and then the result is floored at one point. common/genetics/genes/MagicFighterGene.java public static double damageFor(double sum) { return Math.max(MIN_DAMAGE, BASELINE_DAMAGE * (1.0 + sum)); } Two epigenetic values, not one Every other summed locus here carries a single delta and lets the allele supply the sign. This one carries a gladiator percentage and a wimp percentage on every copy, and only ever reads the one matching its allele. A single shared value would work arithmetically, but it would mean the two alleles drew from the same distribution — and they should not. A gladiator copy is worth a third to a whole baseline; a wimp copy takes off a seventh to three fifths. Writing both on every copy costs one number, keeps each allele’s range its own, and is what lets a carrier’s sheet say what it is carrying. Where the baseline lives HorseAggroHandler registers ATTACK_DAMAGE on EntityType.HORSE , because vanilla horses have none. That registration now takes its value from MagicFighterGene.BASELINE_DAMAGE rather than repeating a number: this locus is what a player reads to find out what a horse hits for, and its wild type has to mean the same thing as a horse that has never been near the gene. The translator writes a base value rather than a modifier, because the gene’s number is absolute — it is the damage the horse deals, not an adjustment to something the reader would have to go and look up. It is only written when it differs, so the common case is a comparison rather than an attribute write on every tick of every horse.
