Magic milk volume
(Magical gene / no coat effect)
How many times a day the horse can be filled from. Wild type is once. The milky allele is worth one to three more, codominant , and the copies add — and because it governs a yield kind rather than a gene, it reaches milk ’s milk, water and lava all three.

Gene key horsegenetics.magic_milk_volume Alleles Mlk milky, n Priority 131 — the magical utility band, beside milk Reaches the game as a charges effect naming the yield kind milk Coat effect none, ever Partly play-tested A Mlk/Mlk mare refilling early is verified ; the same for a water-bearing horse has not been seen. The translator was written against the 26.1.2 sources and is flagged as unverified in its own comments. Checklist on the Verification tab . It governs a kind, not a gene This locus does not know that the milk gene exists. It emits a charges effect naming the yield kind "milk" , and every yield tagged with that kind gets the extra uses — today the plain milk, the water and the lava, all three on one other locus. The indirection is doing real work rather than being tidy. The two loci cannot see each other’s epigenome — a gene is handed its own values and nobody else’s, deliberately — so a design where the milk gene asked “how voluminous am I” could not have read the number at all. Naming a kind is the only version of this that works, and it has the pleasant side effect that a future gene producing some other fluid is governed for free instead of by somebody remembering. neoforge/server/GeneYieldHandler.java int total = 1; for (HorseAbilities.Active active : abilities) { if (active.ability() instanceof GeneAbility.YieldCharges charges && charges.kind().equals(kind) && GeneAbilityHandler.conditionHolds(charges.when(), horse, record)) { total += charges.extra(); } } Why dividing the cooldown, and not a counter A burstable version would need a second stored number on the cooldown attachment and would let a player drain the horse in one visit. Dividing the existing cooldown needs no new state at all — the stamp already on the attachment is enough — so the whole feature survives a restart for free and is inspectable with what was already there. Rounded per copy Each copy’s number is rounded before the two are added, rather than the sum being rounded afterwards. That way the number a horse’s sheet shows for each copy is the number that copy actually contributes, and a heterozygote worth “2” beside a homozygote worth “2 + 3” both add up in front of the reader. Verified A Mlk/Mlk mare fills again after a fraction of a day — the charges divide the cooldown, they do not bank (2026-09-30, the clockwork run in the debug test yard). In MILK BY CLOCK, row J west, a fake player milks the Mlk/Mlk mare and then tries her with a bucket every minute until she fills again, while the plain mare beside her refuses on her cooldown with “Nothing to give yet - try again later.” Every run that reached it logged CLOCKWORK PASS : “filled again 3600 ticks after the first milking (a day is 24000; a plain mare waits the whole of it)”, and 2400 ticks on another run. That covers the plain milk yield only; the water-bearing half is not in the pen.
