Suntouched
(Magical gene / phase 3 + effects)
A horse lit from within — molten-gold mane and tail that stay bright in the dark, and a body that casts light like a torch. It sheds a slow drift of gold sparks as it stands or moves. Suntouched is a data-driven gene — a JSON file, not a Java class — and it is the worked example for the glow effect verb .

The effects The behaviour half is an effects block — two of the six effect verbs . common/ parses it; the NeoForge translator and the client renderer run it. the effects block, from suntouched.json "effects": [ { "type": "glow", "light": 12, "parts": [ "HAIR" ] }, { "type": "emitter", "kind": "particle", "shape": "point", "anchor": "body", "trigger": { "interval": 6 }, "particle": "minecraft:dust", "color": "#ffcf47", "chance": 0.35 } ] the cast light ( light: 12 ) The server keeps a single minecraft:light block at light level 12 trailing the horse — moved when the horse walks into a new block, dropped on death / unload / dimension change ( EntityLeaveLevelEvent ). It tries three positions, in order: the body block, the one above it, then the feet; a spot counts as free if it is air or already a light block. It is skipped in the horse dimension so the read-only horse dimension doesn’t fill with light blocks. A server crash, or a chunk unloading before a queued clear runs, can orphan one block — the same caveat the portal plots carry. There is no when , so a Suntouched horse always glows, foal included. the emissive mane ( parts: ["HAIR"] ) Pure client render. GeneticCoatTextureFactory bakes a second texture — the coat colour on the mane and tail texels, transparent everywhere else — and EmissiveCoatLayer redraws the model through it at full brightness, so the gold hair keeps glowing with no light on it. The colour is exactly what the TOWARD layer above painted, so the two never drift. Foal: tail only (no mane part on the foal mesh), matching the coat layer. the gold-dust aura A minecraft:dust particle in #ffcf47 centred on the horse’s body , a single point every interval = 6 ticks with a per-fire chance of 0.35. Unlike Waterborn’s on_move hoof trail, this one fires whether the horse is standing or moving — a steady shimmer rather than a track. Why glow and not mob_effect: glowing minecraft:glowing only draws the entity outline through walls — it doesn’t light anything and it isn’t gold. Suntouched wants real illumination and a mane that reads as molten metal in a cave, so it uses the glow verb, whose two halves (a world light level, a set of full-bright coat parts) are exactly those two asks. The mob_effect verb is still there for auras like dolphins_grace ; it just isn’t the right tool for “this horse shines”.
