Healer
(Magical gene / phase 3)
A horse that mends the people standing next to it, and carries a red stripe down the middle of its mane that says so. Recessive, so about one wild horse in a hundred and twenty is one — and the sixth of the population carrying a single copy looks like every other horse.

Gene key horsegenetics.healer Priority 116 (after mane colour, before magic zebra) Alleles Hlr n Outcomes wild, healer-carrier , healer Shows when Hlr/Hlr only Default allele n Wild frequency 9% per allele ~0.8% of wild horses, ~16% carriers Founder draws 1 × nextFloat() Deterministic no — the stripe’s opacity varies Aura 1 health point every 40 ticks, players within 3 blocks Built 2026-09-04, not yet play-tested The stripe reads correctly in sample bakes. The aura has never been stood next to. Checklist on the Verification tab . The mark and the effect are the same fact The stripe is not decoration. It is the only way to tell a healer from an ordinary horse without standing beside one and waiting, and it exists because of a rule this mod holds to: a magical ability a player cannot see coming is a magical ability nobody ever learns to breed for. Every gene that does something has to look like it does something. The mark varies; the effect does not The stripe’s opacity is this gene’s one epigenetic value, drawn off the expressing copy: a faint line on one horse, a vivid one on another, inherited with the allele. It says nothing about the strength of the healing. The aura is the same on every healer. That is a deliberate choice: a mark that quietly encoded a stat would make a horse’s value legible from a screenshot, and this model would rather make you keep a pedigree. Drawing a line down a blade The mane is a thin column, rotated out of the world axes by its rest pose, so neither “a band in X” nor “a band in Y” is right for it. HairPattern.centreStripe works in the part’s own axes instead: it runs the stripe along the longest span and centres it across the second, which on the mane’s visible faces reads as a line straight down the middle. common/coat/pattern/HairPattern.java public static double centreStripe(Skin skin, Part part, BodyPoint point, double halfWidth) { Axis across = axesBySpan(skin, part)[1]; Bounds b = HorseSkinGeometry.bounds(skin, part); double centre = (b.min(across) + b.max(across)) * 0.5; double d = Math.abs(point.along(across) - centre) / b.span(across); double edge = Math.max(0.03, halfWidth * 0.5); return 1.0 - BodyStripes.smoothstep(halfWidth - edge, halfWidth + edge, d); } Like every hair gene it paints toward the red rather than with it, so the strand shading survives underneath and a faint stripe genuinely reads as faint rather than as a thinner one. The aura Granted through a healing effect — the first verb in the vocabulary that reaches anything other than the horse and its rider: Parameter Value Why target players People, not livestock — a healer that topped up every animal in a pen would be a farm tool radius 3 blocks A horse worth standing next to, not one that trivialises combat from across a field amount 1 health point Half a heart a beat interval 40 ticks Two seconds — noticeable while you wait, useless mid-fight max_targets 8 The cap every radius effect carries; at three blocks it is unreachable in practice Beats are counted off the horse’s own tick count rather than the world’s, so a stable full of healers does not pulse in lockstep — which matters less for the look than for not doing all of the work on one tick. Every one of these numbers is a first guess and all of them are the sort of thing a play session should move. The aura leaves horses alone Shown 2026-09-30 by the clockwork run in the debug test yard. The HEALER CONTROL pen (row J east) holds one Hlr/Hlr horse and three horses taken to half health a second after the build, and five minutes later logs whether any of them mended. On the second run all three patients were still at 11.0 of 22 five minutes later ( CLOCKWORK PASS ) — so the Healing("players", ...) target field is read, and the aura does not hit everything alive in range. The pen could never have passed before that day: healing moved to hunger-plus-water on 2026-09-14 and every pen got a water cauldron on 09-16, so the first run read two of the three back at full health on their own, one of them the patient furthest from the healer and nearest the water. The pen is dry now ( DebugTestYard.dryPen ) and the patients are hurt a second after the build rather than at it. A foal heals and shows nothing The stripe needs a mane, and the foal mesh has none, so a healer foal is indistinguishable from any other — but it heals , because the aura is a property of the genotype and not of the mane. That is the same split light makes with its glowing mane, and it is worth knowing about: a foal you cannot identify is still doing the work.
