Magic water breathing
(Magical gene / no coat effect)
How long the horse lasts under water before it starts to drown. The graded counterpart of the underwater_breathing traversal flag, which is absolute — and independent of magic swim speed , because crossing a river quickly and surviving the bottom of a lake are different problems.

Gene key horsegenetics.magic_water_breathing Alleles Gil gilled, Shal shallow-lunged, n Priority 145 — the magical body-stat band Reaches the game as a breath effect Coat effect none, ever Verified Gills last longer under water, shallows shorter, and every horse still drowns (2026-09-15, part of gap 121). The worry was the air accumulator: whether a negative supply really drowns a horse, and whether a Shal horse's extra drain could step past -20, the value vanilla drowns at, and never drown at all. The yard's BREATH pen holds three horses in 2×2 water cells under a waterlogged stone-slab lid. A plain stone lid left each head 0.08 above the water, which answered nothing for two runs. In the 09:09 run the first drowning damage came in the expected order: Shal/Shal at tick 40, the plain horse at 340, Gil/Gil at 500. Their lowest air readings were -21, -17 and -19, and all three took drowning damage, so the drain does not skip past drowning. The absolute flag wins, the debt is dropped on surfacing, and Gil/Shal breathes like a plain horse (test yard, pen BREATH, the run of 2026-10-02 03:52 on a56afcbb , three clockwork PASS lines at 03:53:46). An Ocn/Ocn Shal/Shal horse held under for 1200 ticks never fell below 300 air and lost no health (22.000 22.000). A Gil/Gil horse (factor ×1.80) ran out of air at +536 ticks on both of two dives with a refill between, the same air trace tick for tick, so no stale credit crossed over. A Gil/Shal horse (factor ×1.02, its copies’ deltas re-rolled to within 0.08) ran out at 303 ticks against a plain n/n horse’s 298. Graded, beside an absolute flag The format already had underwater_breathing : a traversal flag that refills the horse’s air every tick and can never be beaten. This locus is the dial, and the two are meant to coexist. A horse that cannot drown does not care how slowly it would have, and the composition needs no special case — the flag simply wins by refilling. One expression, both directions Vanilla takes one point of air per submerged tick. For the horse to last factor times as long the drain has to be 1 / factor , so every submerged tick the translator hands back 1 - 1 / factor — positive for a long-breathed horse, negative for a short-breathed one. One line covers both directions, which is the reason to write it this way rather than as two cases. neoforge/server/GeneAbilityHandler.java double owed = BREATH_DEBT.getOrDefault(id, 0.0) + (1.0 - 1.0 / b.factor()); int whole = (int) owed; if (whole != 0) { horse.setAirSupply(Math.min(horse.getMaxAirSupply(), horse.getAirSupply() + whole)); owed -= whole; } BREATH_DEBT.put(id, owed); Air is an int and that quantity is not, so the fraction accumulates per horse until it is worth a whole point. The map is cleared when the horse surfaces and when it leaves the level. Why not the oxygen_bonus attribute Vanilla has one, and it does very nearly this: it gives a 1 / (bonus + 1) chance per tick of not consuming air, which multiplies breath time by bonus + 1 . It was rejected for two reasons. It reaches one direction only . There is no negative bonus that drowns a horse faster, so the shallow-lunged allele would have needed a second mechanism anyway. It rolls a die every tick , so two horses with identical genotypes would drown at different times. This locus is meant to be bred for, and a bred number that does not hold still is not one.
