MITF (splash white)
(Natural gene / phase 1)
The first of the two splash white loci, carrying SW1 , SW3 and SW5 . Splash is caused by variants in two different genes — this one and PAX3 — and that is the whole reason the old single horsegenetics.splash gene had to go. SW1 is the widespread splash allele and the one that hides in plain sight : one copy is usually a star and a sock, and occasionally a blue-eyed splash, on the same genotype.

Gene key horsegenetics.mitf Priority 78 Alleles SW3 SW1 SW5 SW9 N Combinations 10, of which 9 a horse can carry, landing on 5 outcomes Outcomes wild, splash-minimal , splash , splash-bold , splash-extensive Default allele N Wild frequency founders carrying one copy: MitfGene.WILD_SW1_PERCENT , WILD_SW5_PERCENT , WILD_SW3_PERCENT . Heterozygotes only — a doubled splash is bred, not caught Founder draws 1 × nextFloat() Deterministic no Epi draws nextLong() waterline seed, nextFloat() waterline height, then the shared face-marking draw (1 long + 8 floats) Painter WhitePattern.splash , at a strength per outcome — and over a range for SW1/N The alleles Allele One copy Two copies N — wild type SW1 usually subtle — a snip, a sock, sometimes a blue eye; occasionally a full splash viable , and reliably whiter — the best-established viable splash homozygote there is SW3 usually a more obvious splash cannot occur — unconfirmed, likely embryonic lethal SW5 splash-type, variable viability not established — allowed SW9 typical splash with blue eyes; one Pura Raza Espa ola family (McFadden et al. 2023); paints as SW5 not seen, lethality not established — allowed SW6 , SW7 and SW8 are folded into SW5 All four are MITF variants the source describes in word-for-word identical terms — “splash-type variable white pattern; rare; homozygous viability not established”. Four separate alleles would be four indistinguishable rows in a table whose whole point is that each row says something. SW5 stands for the group; splitting them out is one line each the day the science separates them. The combination table Combination Outcome Look SW3/SW1 , SW3/SW5 , SW3/SW9 splash-extensive everything below the topline white; colour only along the spine and over the ears SW3/N , SW1/SW1 , SW1/SW5 , SW1/SW9 , SW5/SW5 , SW5/SW9 , SW9/SW9 splash-bold white well past elbow and stifle, bald face, topline and quarters coloured SW5/N , SW9/N splash high leg white with a clean edge, belly white, broad blaze SW1/N splash-minimal usually a star or a snip and a clean-edged sock or two — but the same genotype sometimes draws the full splash above N/N wild type nothing SW3/SW3 cannot occur SW1 is the one allele here with a documented viable dose effect, so its homozygote is a step up rather than more of the same; SW3 is the strong one, so any second variant beside it tips the horse into the extensive outcome. SW1 is the common one, and it is usually invisible SW1 is a 10-base-pair insertion in MITF ’s melanocyte-specific promoter — a regulatory change, an alteration to the switch rather than to the protein. Three things follow, and together they make it unlike every other allele on this page. It is old. Several hundred years, predating most modern breed formations, which is why it turns up across stock horses, ponies, warmbloods and gaited breeds alike rather than tracing to one stallion the way SW5 – SW8 do. It is widespread. In a 2022 survey it was the splash allele found in by far the most horses and the most breeds; the others are rare and family-limited. It is the most variably expressed thing in the white loci. One copy can be a snip and one white foot, or ordinary-looking face white beside a single blue eye, or a full blue-eyed splash — on the same genotype, in the same family . The paper that identified it says the third point outright: in a minimally expressed horse, splashed white cannot be told from common white markings by eye. So SW1 is the allele that hides in plain sight , and the one worth testing for when a horse’s markings look unremarkable. Which is why SW1/N is painted over a range Every other outcome in the white loci passes WhitePattern.splash a single strength. SW1/N passes a pair , and the horse’s own epigenetic roll picks a point between them — the same roll that then decides how high the waterline sits, so a horse that drew a strong splash draws it high too. It costs no extra draws; only what they are used for changes. Modelling the widespread splash allele at a fixed strength would make it the one thing it is documented not to be: predictable. The outcome is named splash-minimal after the usual case, and its description says so. This allele used to do two jobs. It does one now Because one copy is subtle, SW1 used to carry the mod’s whole population of ordinary-looking marked horses — the stars, the socks, the blazes — and a majority of founders had a copy for exactly that reason. In life that is not where ordinary markings come from. They are largely polygenic, and the same study that identified SW1 found no splash allele at all in 112 horses deliberately selected for minimal white. The markings gene now owns that job, so this allele has dropped to a frequency its own evidence supports and is back to being what it actually is: the one splash variant that genuinely hides in plain sight. An ordinary star on a horse here is now much more likely to be markings than to be a splash carrier — which is the real-world situation, and the reason testing exists. How it paints The horse dipped in white from below. One level waterline in absolute body-space Y rises with strength, taking the legs and belly whole, with a blaze widening to a bald face above it. The line is hard — wobbled at two octaves so it reads torn rather than ruled, but never faded: a sharply bounded margin is the diagnostic difference from KIT ’s ragged sabino edge, and the thing a horse is actually looked at to tell them apart; the red/black gradient has no grey between a coloured texel and a spent one, so a half-scaled black texel samples the warm diagonal and reads gold . A one-pixel fade paints a tan fringe along the entire waterline. (It did, in the first bake.) common/genetics/genes/MitfGene.java private static final double S_MINIMAL_LOW = 0.10; // SW1/N is a RANGE... private static final double S_MINIMAL_HIGH = 0.44; // ...not a value private static final double S_SPLASH = 0.38; private static final double S_BOLD = 0.62; private static final double S_EXTENSIVE = 0.86; Measured white coverage over the standard seed set (the same averageWhite helper WhitePatternGenesTest uses): SW1/N 12%, SW5/N 17%, SW1/SW1 38%, SW3/N 39%, SW3/SW1 69%. One copy each of SW1 and SW2 comes out at 38% — well past either alone, which is the claim the split exists to make and which that test pins as a threshold rather than a number. Blue eyes — built 2026-09-06 Splash’s most recognisable feature is now modelled. Any expressing combination at this locus claims a blue iris, not only the bold ones: blue is diagnostic of splash even when the white itself is modest, which is how a carrier is spotted in the field. It goes through the shared eye-colour channel , at RANK_DEPIGMENTED — so it beats tiger eye ’s amber, because a depigmented iris has no pigment left to recolour. One or two blue eyes. A depigmenting claim frequently fails to reach the whole of both irises: 62% of blue-eyed horses get two whole blue eyes, 22% get exactly one (complete heterochromia, the other eye keeping whatever colour the horse's pigment genes gave it), and 16% get a wedge in one or both. It is one roll off this locus's own stored values, inherited with the allele copy — see the spread . The face Splash’s face marking comes from the shared face-marking vocabulary , with a jag of 0.11 — the same crispness that makes the waterline diagnostic, carried onto the face. But splash runs its face much hotter than its body : the marking strength is the outcome’s strength plus SPLASH_FACE_BOOST (0.34), because a splashed white horse is defined as much by a bold blaze as by the white climbing its legs. So splash reads as a blaze , and splash-bold / a two-locus horse as a bald face . (Without the boost, single-copy splash landed on stars and snips and horses came out bare-faced — the regression this fixes.) splash-minimal is the exception and deliberately so: it runs the ladder from a star at the bottom of its range to a blaze at the top, which is what “you cannot tell it from ordinary markings” has to look like. PAX3 draws from the same vocabulary with the same boost, so a horse splash at both loci gets one bold marking per locus rather than two competing conventions. Verified The two 2026-09-01 splash issues went with the old gene . Splash “not reading its own dose” and its “perfect ring” sock edges were superseded rather than fixed: MITF and PAX3 have real per-combination outcomes, and WhitePattern.splash is one wobbled waterline whose crossing height on a leg is irregular by construction. CoatRegions.whitenLowerLeg and whitenBlaze have no callers. Renders correctly in game (owner-verified 2026-09-04, when KIT , MITF , PAX3 and EDNRB replaced the old white / splash / sabino / frame genes). The eleven-item checklist is in the session log . It predates the eye behaviour these loci gained afterwards (heterochromia) and any retune of MITF ’s painter since.
