Suntouched
(Magical gene / phase 3 + effects)
A horse lit from within — molten-gold mane and tail that stay bright in the dark, and a body that casts light like a torch. It sheds a slow drift of gold sparks as it stands or moves. Suntouched is a data-driven gene — a JSON file, not a Java class — and it is the worked example for the glow effect verb .

Gene key horsegenetics.suntouched Alleles Sntch n Outcomes wild, suntouched Shows when Sntch/n , Sntch/Sntch Default allele n Wild frequency 1 in 128 per allele ~1 wild horse in 64 shows it Founder draws 1 × nextFloat() Deterministic yes — no knobs, so every carrier bakes the same gold mane Epigenetic draws none Priority 210 — a data-driven magical gene, slots before Waterborn (215) and before Test in magicalOrder() Mane colour #ffcf47 (255, 207, 71), 88% of the way there Effects glow light 12 + emissive HAIR , emitter gold-dust aura Partly verified in-game (2026-09-02) Confirmed: the emissive gold mane and tail render (bright in the dark) and look good, the gold-dust emitter shows, and the horse lights the area around it. Still unverified: the light cleaning up on death / unload, the foal case, the horse-dimension skip, and hard base coats (cremello, dominant white). Checklist item is To be verified §13 . That 2026-09-02 check was done in a built pen with a swept floor , which is exactly where the placement bug below could not show. Why it cast almost no light on a server (fixed 2026-09-18) Reported from a dedicated server: sometimes it’s lit up, sometimes it isn’t, but mostly it doesn’t cast any light , and noticeably better in singleplayer. Three separate faults, none of them a throttle: One candidate block, and it had to be air. The light went at six tenths of the horse’s height or nowhere. Tall grass, ferns, flowers, snow layers, crops, shallow water and seagrass all occupy that block, so on natural terrain failing was the common case. It now tries the body block, the one above it, then the feet, and counts an existing light block as free. It trusted its own bookkeeping. If the tracked position still matched the horse, the code returned without checking the block was there — so a light broken by a player, a /fill , a piston or a chunk saved before it existed left that horse dark permanently. The position and the block are both checked now. Singleplayer was not working better; it was littering. EntityLeaveLevelEvent fires on the client level too, and in singleplayer client and integrated server share these static maps. The client’s copy removed the horse from the tracking map before the server’s copy could queue the block for removal, so the light was never cleaned up. Every glowing horse walked away from left its light burning for good. Some of what made singleplayer look right was abandoned light blocks. Now guarded on isClientSide . Still open: a chunk that unloads before its queued clear runs orphans the block ( gap 284 ). Unplayed since the fix — verification §0-FW . The coat: a molten-gold mane and tail The visual half is one ordinary magical coat layer: a PARTS mask on the HAIR parts (mane + tail) crossed with a TOWARD op that walks each hair texel 88% of the way to #ffcf47 . the coat layer, from suntouched.json { "name": "molten-gold glow through the mane and tail", "masks": [ { "type": "PARTS", "parts": [ "HAIR" ] } ], "op": { "type": "TOWARD", "color": "#ffcf47", "strength": 88, "opacity": 100 } } TOWARD rather than TINT for the same reason mane colour and Waterborn use it: it reads what each strand currently looks like and steps it toward the target, so the mane keeps its light and dark instead of flattening to a slab, and it reads the same over a black, a chestnut or a cremello. opacity: 100 means the gold also shows on a dominant-white horse. Suntouched carries no knobs , so a visible carrier is deterministic : every Suntouched horse bakes one shared texture per base coat, and there is nothing on the Sntch copy for a foal to inherit beyond the allele itself. It is the first shipped data-driven gene with no per-horse randomness at all. Ships as a file, like Waterborn Suntouched ships inside the mod the same way Waterborn does: the classpath index neoforge-26.1.2/src/main/resources/horsegenetics/genes/index.json now lists suntouched.json and waterborn.json , and GeneSpecLoader.fromClasspath() registers both from the mod constructor. With two shipped genes: the in-game genotype code is 13 segments , and shorter saved horses will not load; the GenotypeCatalog count is roughly 4× its no-gene size (each shipped DOMINANT two-allele gene doubles it); :common:test is unaffected — the index is in the NeoForge module’s resources, not on the common test classpath, so the golden test and the 11-built-in count still hold. The example-genes/suntouched.json copy that the unit tests read is loaded by name, never as a registered gene. To turn Suntouched off, drop it from index.json and delete the file. Verified The glow verb, seen in game 2026-09-02: the emissive gold mane and tail render and look good, the gold-dust emitter shows, and the horse lights the area around it with a trailing minecraft:light block. Still unchecked: the light cleaning up on death or unload, a foal, and hard base coats ( verification item 13 ). No light blocks in the horse dimension (2026-09-15). The glow verb skips placing its trailing minecraft:light block there on purpose. The yard's SUNTOUCHED pen holds an adult and a foal with suntouched=Sntch/Sntch and counts light blocks at every census. Across the 07:10, 07:33 and 08:01 runs the count stayed at 11, the yard's own lamps inside the pen, from the first census to the last, and never rose.
