Waterborn
(Magical gene / phase 3 + effects)
Neon-blue streaks through the mane and tail, and a horse that walks on the surface of water instead of wading. It leaves a trail of blue sparks where it treads, and a tamed mare can be milked with an empty bucket for a bucket of water. Waterborn is the mod’s first data-driven gene to ship and the first to carry an effects block — it is a JSON file, not a Java class.

Gene key horsegenetics.waterborn Alleles Wtb n Outcomes wild, waterborn Shows when Wtb/n , Wtb/Wtb Default allele n Wild frequency 1 in 90 per allele ~1 wild horse in 45 shows it Founder draws 1 × nextFloat() Deterministic no when expressed — the stripe field varies per horse Epigenetic draws 1 long (stripe seed) + 1 nextFloat (stripe spacing), off the Wtb copy Priority 215 — a data-driven magical gene, slots before Test in magicalOrder() Stripe colour #1ec8ff (30, 200, 255), 92% of the way there Effects traversal walk_on_water, emitter dust trail, yield mare water bucket Partly verified in-game (2026-09-02) Confirmed: the neon streaks in the mane and tail render, and the blue particle trail works. Still unverified: walk_on_water (an approximation — surface buoyancy, not a solid plane) and the tamed-mare milking. Checklist item is To be verified §13 . The coat: neon streaks in the mane and tail The visual half is one ordinary magical coat layer: a STRIPES mask restricted to the HAIR parts (mane + tail) crossed with a TOWARD op that walks each covered texel 92% of the way to #1ec8ff . the coat layer, from waterborn.json { "name": "neon blue stripes down the mane and tail", "masks": [ { "type": "STRIPES", "parts": [ "HAIR" ], "seed": "$stripeSeed", "spacing": "$stripeSpacing", "duty": 0.4, "warp": 0.8 } ], "op": { "type": "TOWARD", "color": "#1ec8ff", "strength": 92, "opacity": 100 } } TOWARD rather than TINT for the same reason mane colour uses it: it reads what each strand currently looks like and steps it toward the target, so the mane keeps its light and dark instead of turning into a flat slab, and it reads the same on a black, a chestnut or a cremello. opacity: 100 means the streaks also show on a dominant-white horse. Two knobs make the pattern per-horse, so no two Waterborn manes are identical: Knob Range Effect stripeSeed a nextLong() seeds the BodyStripes field — where the streaks fall and how the noise warps them. stripeSpacing 1.6–2.8 body units centre-to-centre gap. Tight, so the hair reads as several thin streaks rather than one band. duty 0.4 = 40% of each period is streak; warp 0.8 bends them off-straight. Because a knob is in play, a visible Waterborn is non-deterministic : each horse bakes its own texture, keyed by the seed on the Wtb copy it carries, and a foal that inherits that copy inherits the exact streak pattern. The first gene that ships as a file Every other gene is either a hand-written Java class or a file the player drops in themselves. Waterborn ships inside the mod : a classpath index ( neoforge-26.1.2/src/main/resources/horsegenetics/genes/index.json ) that GeneSpecLoader.fromClasspath() registers from the mod constructor. Suntouched was added beside it the same way. It was done to make the effects work testable without a config drop, and it breaks the standing “no gene ships by default” rule on purpose — with the two shipped genes: the in-game genotype code is 13 segments , and shorter saved horses will not load; the GenotypeCatalog count is roughly 4× its no-gene size (each shipped DOMINANT two-allele gene doubles it); :common:test is unaffected — that index is in the NeoForge module’s resources, not on the common test classpath, so the golden test and the 11-built-in count still hold. To turn Waterborn off, drop it from index.json and delete the file. The horse dimension is due for an overhaul regardless. Verified Milking a waterborn mare works (owner-confirmed in play, 2026-09-10). Milking had never worked on any horse before the cooldown-sentinel fix. Seen in game 2026-09-02 , the first data-driven effects gene run in a live game (boot log: [genes] loaded 2 data-driven gene(s) ): the neon-blue streaks in the mane and tail render, and the blue particle trail works. Still unchecked: streaks on cremello and dominant white, walking on water, and milking for water ( the checklist ). Every effect in the file reaches the game (checked 2026-09-15, from the logs). GeneAbilityHandler logs [genes] effect '…' (from …) is defined but not translated once for any effect type it has no translation for. That line appears 0 times in the saved logs of 2026-09-14 and 15 and in the 10:57 launch, all of which loaded Waterborn. A loose waterborn horse holds itself up in water without bobbing (owner's call, 2026-09-15, on the yard's readings). The yard's WATERBORN pen (row AA) logs each horse's height against the water's top. The grown horse sat steady at y −0.23 against a water top of −0.1, while the foal and the control drifted between −0.26 and −0.52. So it floats a little into the water rather than standing on the surface, and never bobs. The owner: sitting a bit in the water is fine as long as it does not bob. A ridden waterborn horse is still a check for a person.
