LIVE CUTOVER RUNBOOK - for the OWNER, written 2026-10-04, never run by a session.
The live server (26.1.2-neoforge-server, players on it) is not ours to touch from a session (CLAUDE.md hard rule 12: processes
are stopped only with tools/stop-dev-java.ps1; the live server is stopped by the owner, the way she normally does it, never
by PID or by pattern). Do this when the converter has passed on a COPY and the new jar has passed its boots.

BEFORE
 1. Tell the players the day and the length of the outage. Tell any outside testers on old tags before 0.6.0 ships.
 2. Have the new jar (0.6.0), the converter jar, and room on the disk: the world plus about a tenth again, twice
    (the original, and the converted copy).
STOP AND BACK UP
 3. Stop the server the way you normally do. Wait until it has fully exited and saved.
 4. Copy the whole world folder to a safe place (a dated backup). Do not convert the backup; keep it as is.
CONVERT
 5. java -jar ixoras-converter.jar "<world>" --dry-run      read the report: counts by kind, renamed folders, no ERRORS.
 6. java -jar ixoras-converter.jar "<world>"                 it writes "<world> (converted)" beside it and a report file.
    It must end with "original byte-identical: true" and "old tokens left in the output: 0". If it does not, STOP: the
    original is untouched; keep the report.
 7. Packs: java -jar ixoras-converter.jar "<world>" --packs "<datapack or resource pack>" ...   answers y/n per pack; a
    converted copy is written beside each, never over it. Swap them in by hand.
START THE NEW JAR
 8. Put the converted folder where the server expects the world (give it the world's name; keep the original beside it under
    another name). Replace the old jar with the 0.6.0 jar; move the config folder only if the mod does not do it itself.
 9. Start the server. In the log look for: "Done (", no "[genes] a saved horse carried" warning, no refusal message.
10. Check by eye: a few horses (name, coat, pedigree), the realm, a stasis bank, a cart, a splice, a research paper.
ROLL BACK
11. If anything is wrong: stop the server, put the original world folder back, put the old jar back. Nothing was changed in it.
