Never delete this file. When everything in it is done or intaken to the road map, just leave this line. 

Adding ender chests to horses. Improving the look go chested hordes in general, and adding support for more kinds of chests on horses from other mods

Adding new genes for zombie and skeleton horses, and then having them spawn as any breed except they have those new genes. Skeleton horses have a recessive skeleton gene that makes them heal without needing to eat (and indeed, they cannot eat) while looking like a skeleton. Skeleton horses are aggressive but can be permanently passified by feeding them a bone. Zombie horses have a gene that makes them literally have twice as many hearts, but at a big speed penalty. They are obligate carnivores and they are all aggressive and can only be temporarily passified with raw meat, until they're tamed. Need to overhaul ho zombie and skeleton horses spawn, so they can spawn as any breed, but with these genes. 

I had a whole bunch more typed but then I closed the tab and lost it all, so now we're doing it again! Ugh. 

https://www.minecraftforum.net/forums/mapping-and-modding-java-edition/minecraft-mods/2447896-the-reindeer-breed-has-arrived-wings-horns-and
Add all the breeds from this to the road map, even though it'll require me to learn to 3D model. See if there's any unicorn powers which are worth adding as genes. See if there's any other content worth integrating. 

https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/mc-mods/horse-tack
Add all these pieces as light armor, but do it as an overlay like the saddle (see if we can procedurally generate the model just from cloning the existing horse model and erasing all the parts it doesn't touch). Expand the Equestrian dying table to allow dying these and adding more customization to all of them, like stripes or dots. Expand the armor screen of our horse menu to include slots for all of these different pieces. Integrate with banners to allow their patterns to be used instead. Have a 3D preview of what the piece will look like, and allow you to preview it on any of your horses. 


https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/mc-mods/realistic-horse-genetics
The main difference between this mod and ours is that they have bespoke coats, rather than procedurally generated ones. But see if there's anything other than that that they offer, that we can integrate into our mod. 

https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/mc-mods/animania
I want to implement the troughs from this using my existing framework for modular things made of wood, and allow it to be made in any square/rectangle shape. Also the salt licks. Also imement anything from this which applies to horses. But keep in line with our existing philosophy, especially that of carrot not stick. Also see if that mod adds a cart, and see if we can add that to our roster of carts? 

Overhaul how carts are made in our mod. Add a cart crafting bench, which allows you to select the wood for every individual piece of the cart as well as dye or paint the wood. This crafting bench should also allow you to make jumps in a similar fashion, applying not just dye but patterns as well, and letting you alter the opacity of them, as well as adding little flags to the jumps and doing potentially two deep jumps. 


https://www.planetminecraft.com/mod/simply-cross-country-1-16-5/
Adding jumps that look more like these. 

https://www.planetminecraft.com/mod/wonderful-enchantments/
Some of these horse armor enchantments might be better as genes, but let's integrate horse armor enchantments into our mod, and allow them to be applied (with logic) to any tack or horse shoes created. We will also need to expand the inventory screen to allow two chest slots, a slot for every individual piece of tack including separating out the saddle and bridle, the barding, saddle pad, boots on every leg, horse shoes on every leg, martingale/collar, and flymask. And each piece should be enchantable.

The location of the horse on the h menu when you click it should use the /tp command to attempt to teleport your horse to you. Add another column that's active when any client side map mod is active, where they check a box and it creates a wyapoint over their horse that updates every 30 seconds. 

The h menu should refresh automatically every time it's opened, a horse birth occurs, or a horse death 
Occurs. 

https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/mc-mods/sullys-mod
Examine this mod and see if there's any horse features worth integrating into ours. 