2026-09-18, after the compat pass — The homestead was never rare, and now there is a number

    Asked to fix the equestrians not appearing in villages, with a hunch attached: the house
    might need rotating, it might be too wide. The hunch was half right and the premise was
    wrong, and finding out which was which turned out to be the whole session.

    The half that was right. The piece carried one street connector,
    and a jigsaw pair fixes a candidate's rotation completely — exactly one of the four
    rotations turns that connector back at the road. So the 16×18 homestead could only
    ever lie one way against a street: sixteen blocks straight out, two of its width on one
    side of the road's line and fifteen on the other, every time. A village house standing in
    those fifteen threw the piece out with no second arrangement to try. It now carries
    three, all in the walk column so the road
    always meets the path rather than a wall — head-on at the barn doors as before, and
    one at each end of the walk. Three of the four rotations attach and the generator keeps
    whichever fits.

    The premise that was wrong.
    Gap 270 said the homestead might have stopped generating
    altogether when the house was deepened for the four equestrians, and three separate
    entries said no automated thing could ever answer that — fresh world, walk, count by
    eye. All of that was false, in both directions. Structure.generate
    is the village generator: it runs the whole jigsaw placement, every bounding-box
    test included, and hands back the finished piece list without touching a
    world. So worldgen/HomesteadCensus builds the overworld generator for
    a seed, asks the structure spread which chunks are village chunks, and reads the piece
    lists. Two hundred and sixty-five villages is about a minute.

    the piecehomesteadsrateconnector used

        one connector247 of 26593.2%west 247
        three connectors262 of 26598.9%north 88, south 102, west 72

    Same forty seeds, same 265 villages, so the difference is the piece. It was in
    ninety-three per cent of plains villages the whole time. The fear was reasoning
    — a big piece in a small slot must usually fail — and the reasoning left out
    that a village has several terminator slots and only needs one of them to take it. The
    connectors are worth having; they closed fifteen of the eighteen villages that had none.
    They are an improvement and not a rescue, and the page now says so in those words.

    What this owes. The census only knows whether the piece won its slot. Two
    things it cannot see are newly worth a look: whether a homestead the road meets
    end-on reads properly — that arrangement did not exist before today —
    and whether the ground it lands on is somewhere you would live. The rate itself needs
    nobody's time: ./gradlew :neoforge-26.1.2:runGameTest recounts it, and
    homestead_still_generates holds a loose 75% floor so a future collapse is
    caught rather than discovered.

    The lesson worth keeping is not about villages. Three sessions wrote
    "nothing automated can answer this" about a question the game's own code answers in a
    method call, and the cost was a gap that sat open scaring people off a piece that was
    fine. It is worth asking, before writing that sentence again, whether the thing in doubt
    is genuinely about play or is just about a function nobody had tried calling directly.
