2026-09-18, after the carts — Six mods add a steel, and the mod stops loading

    A tester put v0.5.012 on a 319-jar pack an hour after it was published, and it did not
    start. Not a broken armour — the mod did not load at all, which on
    their server meant the server did not come up. They sent back the stack trace, the
    compat: line above it, a table of every colliding id, and two reproducers.
    Almost all of the diagnosis in this entry is theirs; the session's work was deciding what
    the fix should be and finding out what else was hiding behind it.

java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Duplicate registration redstone_alloy_horse_armor
    at DeferredRegister$Items.registerItem(DeferredRegister.java:714)
    at ModdedArmour.<clinit>(ModdedArmour.java:93)

A name that was never unique

    compat/ModdedArmour registered one horse armour per scanned metal, and the id
    came from the material name alone: steel_horse_armor. Leaving the mod's name
    out is deliberate — “Steel Horse Armor” is what a player searches for
    — but it was written as though a material were an item. It is not. The scan dedupes
    by namespace:path, one level finer than the id it hands to the registry, so
    six mods each adding a steel ingot produced six items wanting one name.
    Nineteen material names collided on that pack; redstone_alloy was merely the
    first one the registry reached.

    The crash lands in a static initialiser reached from the mod constructor, which is what
    turns a cosmetic clash into an ExceptionInInitializerError and a dead mod.
    Gap 274 had actually described this feature already,
    and got it wrong in a way worth recording: it said “the ids differ, so nothing is
    ambiguous to the game”. True of gates, whose ids carry a namespace. False of
    armour, whose ids did not. The sentence was checked against one half of a feature and
    written as though it covered both.

Collapsing was the honest fix, not only the cheap one

    Ids now collapse by material name: six
    steels give one Steel Horse Armor, the winner being the lowest item id so load order stays
    irrelevant. The tempting alternative — put the namespace in the id — was
    rejected twice over. It gives the player six near-identical recipe-book entries, and
    it would not have fixed the crash: the tester had also found
    extendedae:entro_crystal and extendedae:entro_ingot, which
    collide inside a single jar. Collapsing is also simply more correct, because those six
    steels already share a c:ingots/steel repair tag — six registrations
    would have been six identical items.

    The thing that had to be got right alongside it: all six ingots still forge the
    armour. Recipes are written per ingot rather than per armour now, because the
    alternative is a dead end a player cannot see — holding a steel ingot, looking at a
    steel armour in the recipe book, and watching the grid refuse. And
    metals() deliberately keeps every one of the 167, because the bench colours a
    fitting from whichever ingot was actually put in it.

Two things found by looking, and one by booting

    The tester's second reproducer, bloodmagic:ingot_hellforged, showed the affix
    strip was prefix-blind — it would have been sold as “Ingot Hellforged Horse
    Armor”. Both ends are stripped now. Separately, the generated pack's fingerprint
    turned out to hash what the mods are and not what the rules do, so this
    very rename would have left upgraders holding a folder built the old way; it carries a
    rules version now.

    And the last bug was the session's own. The report asked for a guard so that a compat
    <clinit> could never again kill mod construction, which was right, and
    the first version of that guard declared its Set below the static
    block that used it. Static initialisers run in source order, so the field was
    null and the anti-crash guard crashed at load — the identical failure shape, in the
    code added to prevent it. A runServer boot caught it in about ninety seconds;
    a green build had not, and could not.
    Written up, because nothing but a real mod
    load runs those blocks in anger.

    Shipped as v0.5.013 with the jar attached. Verified as far as a server can verify it: 5
    metals scanned, 4 armours registered, entro_horse_armor once,
    hellforged_horse_armor correctly named. The per-ingot recipes are not
    verified at all — the synthetic mod registers no items, so every generated
    recipe still takes the itemExists skip, and that is now the most likely thing
    in the release to be wrong (§0-FQ,
    gap 272). The next real question is one only the
    tester can answer, and it is worth asking for the launch log either way.
