2026-09-26 — a blank tab, and the search language that came out of it


    It started as one sentence:

        the horse realm tab shows literally nothing while I'm in the horse realm

    and by the end the mod had a SQL search language, a query builder, and a
    command that rains emeralds on people. What follows is roughly in the order
    it was asked. The thread worth keeping is that THREE of the day's bugs were
    invisible for the same reason — something that looked like a feature doing
    nothing was actually a feature that had never been constructed at all.


1. THE REALM TAB DREW NOTHING, AND IT WAS NOT A COMPILE ERROR

    HorseBrowserScreen's render switch:

        switch (tab) {
            case MY_HORSES -> drawMyHorses(g, mouseX, mouseY);
            ...                              <- REALM absent

    An arrow-form switch STATEMENT over an enum need not be exhaustive. Only a
    switch EXPRESSION must be. So this compiled clean, the tab strip carried an
    entry, and clicking it painted an empty panel.

    Its filter box, Refresh button and scroll wheel were all gated on
    `tab == Tab.MY_HORSES` for the same reason and were dark with it.

    WORTH REMEMBERING: a missing enum case in a statement switch is silent.
    Three of this codebase's per-tab behaviours were gated on one tab each,
    which is the pattern that made one omission into five.


2. THE REALM TABLE COULD ONLY EVER HAVE SHOWN A FRACTION OF THE FIELD

    Fixing (1) exposed the bigger problem. RealmRoster walked the realm level's
    LIVE ENTITIES, which is the natural shape for "what is in the field right
    now" and wrong for one reason: most of the field is unloaded most of the
    time. The realm is 1,600 blocks in radius; a player loads a dozen chunks of
    it. The tab listed the horses within sight of whoever opened it.

    The fix was to stop asking the world. HorseRealmSize's census already knew
    WHO is in the field — it is maintained by the horses themselves and keeps a
    horse nobody has loaded for a week. The ancestry database already knew WHAT
    they are. Between them a row can be built for a horse on the far side of the
    field with no chunk loaded anywhere; a horse that happens to be loaded
    overlays bond, age and position on top.

    THE NUMBER THAT SHAPED THE REST: a full genotype code is 5,612 characters,
    and every row carries one because the table sorts and filters on it. Three
    thousand rows do not fit in a packet at any cap. So the roster is sent in
    batches of a hundred, the table draws itself as it fills, and — after the
    owner asked why it was being re-fetched at all — it is pushed once when a
    player walks in and kept current by one-horse deltas.

    The server-wide record already existed. What was missing was anyone telling
    the clients when it changed.

    COST: the census had to start recording WHERE each horse stands, so that
    claiming an unloaded one has a chunk to pull in. That changed its saved
    shape, so an existing world loads with the field's radius intact and its
    census empty. The radius was the half that had to survive — losing it would
    put the wall inside the field. One lap of the field rebuilds the rest.


3. HORSES WERE NOT SPAWNING IN THE REALM. THEY WERE WALKING IN.

    Reported as two things:

        there's horses spawning in the horse realm? nothing should spawn there
        horses should not be able to go through the horse portal by standing in it

    They were one line. PortalEventHandler gave the dwell timer to ANY horse
    whose feet were in a portal block, with no check on who put it there. So a
    lit portal was a drain in both directions: wild Overworld horses grazed
    across one and were pulled in three seconds later, and unclaimed realm
    horses let themselves out of the field somebody left them in for safekeeping.

    A horse now needs escorting — ridden, on a player's lead, or snapped in by
    the roped-horse right-click, which seeds the dwell map itself and so still
    works. A horse tied to a FENCE beside a portal is parked, not travelling.

    NOT THE BUG IT LOOKED LIKE. "Horses are spawning" had no spawn in it at all.
    The realm's biome has empty spawner lists in every category; nothing was
    ever spawning. A `nothingSpawnsHere` rule went in anyway, because that is a
    fact about a JSON file and the promise is worth more than one file.


4. THE COWBOY'S FILTER BOX HAD NEVER EXISTED

        Because right now it's just broken and doesn't do anything

    It was created only if the merchant menu's offers looked like a cowboy's:

        if (!(event.getScreen() instanceof MerchantScreen screen) || !sellsHorses(screen))

    and at ScreenEvent.Init.Post THERE ARE NO OFFERS. The server sends the
    open-screen packet and the offer list as two packets in that order, so the
    client builds the screen against an empty MerchantMenu and fills it a moment
    later. sellsHorses answered false every single time. There was never a box.

    Now built for every merchant screen and shown once the offers arrive — and
    that answer is LATCHED, which is not an optimisation: filtering down to no
    matches empties the offer list, which would un-answer the question and take
    away the very box the player needs to clear the filter with.

    SAME SHAPE AS (1). "The feature does nothing" and "the feature was never
    constructed" look identical from the player's side.


5. THE FOURTH SEARCH ENGINE

    Asked to make the search boxes share one function. Two surprises:

      - the three the owner named ALREADY shared HorseQuery. The realm table is
        the My horses renderer; the stasis bank wraps the same function.
      - there was no search box in the horse dimension at all, and never had been.

    What was actually unshared was the COWBOY, which used HorseSearch — a second
    engine doing space-separated substrings over a HorseRecord. So `gen>2` meant
    nothing at a counter while working in a browser two keys away. It now builds
    the row HorseQuery expects. HorseSearch and its test are deleted.

    So "unify the search" turned into "give them a language worth sharing".


6. THE LANGUAGE

    Asked for AND / NOT / OR, then for something "more like a SQL query". Settled
    on the WHERE clause alone: there is one table and you always want every
    column of it, so SELECT and FROM are ceremony you would type into a one-line
    box before every search, for ever. The box IS the clause.

    THE PART THAT LET IT GO IN UNDER A SCREENFUL OF GREEN TESTS: adjacent terms
    are implicitly ANDed, which is exactly what the box did when it had no
    operators. So `mare gen>2 -lethal` still means what it always meant, `-term`
    is still NOT, `:` is still `=`. HorseQueryTest's twenty tests are UNCHANGED
    and still pass; QueryExprTest adds twenty-four for the grammar.

    THE GENUINELY NEW THING: a gene name is a column. `healer = hom`. Before
    this, zygosity was unaskable without already knowing the answer —
    `genotype:Fly/Fly` requires both allele tokens spelled out, so you could only
    ask it about genes you had already looked up.

    `hom` counts REAL ALLELES rather than comparing the two slots. The reserved
    slot in a stallion's X-linked pair is not an allele he has, so
    AllelePair.homozygous() would read every stallion alive as homozygous at
    every sex-linked locus. That is the same trap carries() already carried a
    comment about, which is why it was spotted.

    The parser never throws, and the test walks EVERY PREFIX of a real query to
    pin it: a search box is typed one character at a time, so every prefix of a
    valid query is one somebody is a keystroke away from having. A dangling AND
    deliberately keeps filtering on what came before it — a table that empties
    itself the moment you type AND reads as broken.


7. A DESIGN CALL THAT WAS NOT MINE TO MAKE

    Asked for the cowboy to pay more for rare and especially homozygous genes.
    That runs straight into philosophy §4 — "no rarity tier, no this is the good
    one" — which HorsePrices' own javadoc cites as settled reasoning.

    Raised it rather than implementing it. The owner's answer was better than
    either option offered: a flat base, plus more for HOW MANY genes a horse
    carries and how many it breeds true at, EVEN BAD ONES.

    That keeps §4 intact. Counting is not ranking: a lethal and a dished face
    count the same because both are material, and a homozygous carrier of
    something ruinous fetches more because it is more RELIABLE, not nicer. He is
    buying breeding stock by weight.

    The numbers are measured, not guessed — 600 rolled founders across every
    breed average 11.7 carried loci and 5.4 homozygous, over 333 registered
    genes. Re-measure before moving the constants; the mean shifts every time a
    gene joins the registry.


8. SMALLER THINGS

    - Clicking a gear slot now lists what fits it. Fifteen of the seventeen gear
      tags are empty, so most slots say "nothing takes this slot yet" — which is
      a different sentence from "nothing you are carrying fits here", and the
      difference is whether it is worth going to look for the item.
    - Turning a horse out pays two emeralds; /horsebounty back-pays everyone who
      gave a horse to the field before it did. Idempotent PER HORSE, not per run.
      The release fee writes into the same ledger, or an operator running the
      command after a session would pay twice for everything turned out in it.
    - A Query tab builds a search from dropdowns. It emits TEXT, so there is one
      language and not two — a structured form only that tab could produce would
      be a second dialect every other screen would have to learn, and a query you
      could read but not hand-edit.
    - Every dropdown sorts and takes type-to-jump. There are five, all
      hand-rolled because vanilla has no anchored list widget; rather than unify
      five screens' drawing, the BEHAVIOUR they were all missing is one object
      each of them holds.


9. ONE THING FOUND AND NOT FIXED

    CLAUDE.md hard rule 2 says common/ "uses no Java 9+ APIs". The module uses
    List.of 457 times, records in 95 files, arrow switch expressions in 56, and
    String.strip in 5 — and its build.gradle.kts targets Java 17. The rule as
    written is not what the code does; the real constraint is narrower and is
    what its own examples are (System.getLogger, Long.parseUnsignedLong — things
    TeaVM's class library lacks).

    Raised with the owner, left alone. Narrowing a hard rule is theirs to do.
    Recorded on architecture.html's Verification tab.


WHAT SHIPPED: 0.5.031, jar attached to the GitHub release.

WHAT IS WAITING: everything above is unplayed. The realm page, breeding.html
and villagers.html carry the checks. The first one that matters is the census
reset in (2) — read the table before walking the field and it will look like
the realm lost horses.
